[Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kaladin', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3782b08e-bf98-4738-86a1-3069f0d99c0c'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin, nicknamed Kal, renowned as Kaladin Stormblessed, is a Windrunner of the Knights Radiant from Alethkar. Despite being trained as a surgeon from an early age by his father, his chosen profession is that of a soldier. He is famed as the captain of Highprince Dalinar Kholin's personal guard, a unit known as Bridge Four, commander of the bridgemen battalion and Highmarshal of the Order of Windrunners. Kaladin has known adversity and loss throughout his life. He has suffered repeated oppression and betrayal by the lighteyed nobility, including being driven from his home by the citylord of his hometown as a teenager and being sold into slavery by the commander of his army. Kaladin has also been unable to save numerous patients, comrades, subordinates, and even his brother Tien from death. Despite these challenges, or perhaps because of them, Kaladin is driven to protect others. Utilizing his skills as a surgeon, he attempts to save as many lives as possible."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kaladin', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3782b08e-bf98-4738-86a1-3069f0d99c0c'}, page_content='Kaladin - As a soldier, he rescued thousands of soldiers during the Battle of the Tower, liberated a thousand bridgemen, and defended Dalinar Kholin and King Elhokar Kholin from numerous assassins. He has bonded with the honorspren Sylphrena, more commonly known as Syl. This bond allows him to discover his powers as a Surgebinder and destiny as a member of the Knights Radiant, an order which has been defunct ever since the Day of Recreance. Kaladin, along with Dalinar Kholin, Renarin Kholin, and Shallan Davar, is one of the new founding members of the Knights Radiant in centuries. Their public revelation during the Battle of Narak serves as the catalyst for the re-founding of the Knights Radiant. After the re-founding of the Knights Radiant, Kaladin helped the expansion of the Knights Radiant by taking on Bridge Four as squires, with most of them eventually becoming Knights themselves.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance and Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fd70598d-2948-4a61-803e-cefb2812e9cf'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Appearance and Personality \n\n Appearance \n\nKaladin is a very tall man, even tall by Alethi standards, standing approximately 6\'4" in Rosharan feet (nearly seven cosmere standard feet). He is leanly muscular and has multiple scars on his body.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance and Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fd70598d-2948-4a61-803e-cefb2812e9cf'}, page_content="Kaladin - He has tan skin and shoulder-length wavy black hair typical of an Alethi. He was born with dark brown eyes, though after swearing the Third Ideal of the Windrunners, his eyes turn a pale, glowing blue whenever he summons Syl as a Shardblade, and for a few hours after he dismisses her. Like most Rosharans, Kaladin's eyes have an epicanthic fold. His face is square and firm with strong lines and a proud chin."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance and Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fd70598d-2948-4a61-803e-cefb2812e9cf'}, page_content='Kaladin - He prefers to be clean-shaven but during his time as a slave, he grows a long, scraggly beard. He is branded on his forehead with a sas nahn glyphpair indicating his slavery and a shash glyph meaning "dangerous". These brands disappeared after Kaladin swore the Fourth Ideal. Personality \n\nKaladin is a natural leader who inspires belief and confidence in his men. His squad members in Amaram\'s army call him lucky and believe that being in his squad grants them supernatural protection. Kaladin also transforms Bridge Four from a dejected and despondent group with the worst reputation into a highly-motivated and effective fighting force. Dalinar Kholin remarks that his men are remarkably loyal and think very highly of him. Ever since childhood, Kaladin has had a strong protective instinct, which only grows once he begins discovering and swearing the Immortal Words. He uses his medical skills to save people, first as an apprentice surgeon and later as a battlefield medic. As a youth, he joins the army so he can look after his younger brother, Tien. As a squadleader in Amaram\'s army, he recruits the youngest members with the least training to his squad so that he can train and protect them As captain of Dalinar\'s personal guard, he protects Dalinar and the king from assassins on multiple occasions. Kaladin shows a deep sense of loss when those under his protection die and has a tendency toward depression in various forms. By the time he joins Bridge Four, he has lost so many people that he has fallen into a deep depression. He thinks himself cursed because he always survives when others do not. At his lowest points, Kaladin falls into apathetic despair and becomes suicidal. This happened twice, the first during his first few weeks as a Bridgeman, where the constant death broke what little will he had left; the second when Teft was murdered and his father was thrown off Urithiru. He is also prone to seasonal depression, feeling a sense of heavy melancholy during the weeks of the Weeping. Kaladin is deeply conflicted about killing, finding it philosophically hard to justify and the notion that one must kill in order to protect ironic and paradoxical. Although he is a soldier, he has been trained as a surgeon, whose highest calling is to save all lives. Additionally, as a member of the Order of Windrunners, he lives by the Ideals of his order, to which protecting life is central. It is further irony that Kaladin\'s powers of killing appear to be at their strongest when he is actively protecting something or someone. This paradox has plagued Kaladin and Syl, who have both been unable to explain why killing is justified if the protection of life matters. Kaladin also displays several classic symptoms of clinical depression and seasonal affective disorder, amplified by the loss and pressures that are forced upon him. He is prone to depressive episodes, particularly during the Weeping, in Shadesmar, or in prison—places with little to no sunlight. Despite the outward confidence he is often able to show, he often feels like a failure, focusing on the many deaths that he feels he could have prevented. During these times, he feels morose and chapters from his point of view describe that he was feeling "gray" and morose spiraling farther into depression. Kaladin draws a black and white distinction between lighteyes and darkeyes, harboring a deep resentment and distrust for virtually all lighteyes, fueled by the betrayals of people like Roshone, Amaram, and Katarotam. Ironically, Kaladin himself is noted to have many lighteyed qualities. Many characters remark that Kaladin has the bearing of a lighteyes—meaning a leader or noble, since the term "lighteyes" encompasses these qualities in the Alethi language—and others have noted that "Kaladin" sounds like a lighteyed name, rather than a darkeyed name. Further, when Kaladin comes into his true power as a Knight Radiant, he becomes lighteyed. Kaladin despises these qualities in himself, because they make him more similar to lighteyes. Due to his recent struggles, Kaladin shows hostility and resentment, although at times his wit, sarcasm, and intelligence show through. He appears to have got his sense of humor from his mother and is constantly questioning the world around him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance and Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fd70598d-2948-4a61-803e-cefb2812e9cf'}, page_content="Kaladin - He dislikes beards, finding the way that they itch at the corner of his mouth to be annoying. Due to this, he tries to shave his own whenever he can. He finds the Vorin insistence on gender norms to be ridiculous and doesn't expect anyone to live up to them, questioning why people mocked others, like Renarin, for not being the traditional masculine ideal. However, he does seem to still believe in them and the dichotomy they enforce on how one's role in society, he simply doesn't enforce them himself. While Kaladin is accepting of gay people such as Drehy, he considers them to be unmasculine, and considers Drehy's own beliefs in Vorin gender norms to be funny considering his sexuality. However, this doesn't lead him to acting in a bigoted manner against gay men, and even apologizes when he winds up insulting them. This can be traced back to how Vorin society in general accepts it due to their focus on oaths; mixed with the beliefs in very strict gender norms, which, while Kaladin does not fully buy into them, do influence the way he sees the world. These two factors can be seen as shaping his views on homosexuality."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b25982aa-92bf-464c-9c4f-113b6a726907'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Appearance \n\nKaladin is a very tall man, even tall by Alethi standards, standing approximately 6\'4" in Rosharan feet (nearly seven cosmere standard feet). He is leanly muscular and has multiple scars on his body.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b25982aa-92bf-464c-9c4f-113b6a726907'}, page_content='Kaladin - He has tan skin and shoulder-length wavy black hair typical of an Alethi. He was born with dark brown eyes, though after swearing the Third Ideal of the Windrunners, his eyes turn a pale, glowing blue whenever he summons Syl as a Shardblade, and for a few hours after he dismisses her. Like most Rosharans, Kaladin\'s eyes have an epicanthic fold. His face is square and firm with strong lines and a proud chin. He prefers to be clean-shaven but during his time as a slave, he grows a long, scraggly beard. He is branded on his forehead with a sas nahn glyphpair indicating his slavery and a shash glyph meaning "dangerous". These brands disappeared after Kaladin swore the Fourth Ideal.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Personality', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3cccc29f-e064-4a8f-a7f0-f26755cf8a0a'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Personality \n\nKaladin is a natural leader who inspires belief and confidence in his men. His squad members in Amaram\'s army call him lucky and believe that being in his squad grants them supernatural protection. Kaladin also transforms Bridge Four from a dejected and despondent group with the worst reputation into a highly-motivated and effective fighting force. Dalinar Kholin remarks that his men are remarkably loyal and think very highly of him. Ever since childhood, Kaladin has had a strong protective instinct, which only grows once he begins discovering and swearing the Immortal Words. He uses his medical skills to save people, first as an apprentice surgeon and later as a battlefield medic. As a youth, he joins the army so he can look after his younger brother, Tien. As a squadleader in Amaram\'s army, he recruits the youngest members with the least training to his squad so that he can train and protect them As captain of Dalinar\'s personal guard, he protects Dalinar and the king from assassins on multiple occasions. Kaladin shows a deep sense of loss when those under his protection die and has a tendency toward depression in various forms. By the time he joins Bridge Four, he has lost so many people that he has fallen into a deep depression. He thinks himself cursed because he always survives when others do not. At his lowest points, Kaladin falls into apathetic despair and becomes suicidal. This happened twice, the first during his first few weeks as a Bridgeman, where the constant death broke what little will he had left; the second when Teft was murdered and his father was thrown off Urithiru. He is also prone to seasonal depression, feeling a sense of heavy melancholy during the weeks of the Weeping. Kaladin is deeply conflicted about killing, finding it philosophically hard to justify and the notion that one must kill in order to protect ironic and paradoxical. Although he is a soldier, he has been trained as a surgeon, whose highest calling is to save all lives. Additionally, as a member of the Order of Windrunners, he lives by the Ideals of his order, to which protecting life is central. It is further irony that Kaladin\'s powers of killing appear to be at their strongest when he is actively protecting something or someone. This paradox has plagued Kaladin and Syl, who have both been unable to explain why killing is justified if the protection of life matters. Kaladin also displays several classic symptoms of clinical depression and seasonal affective disorder, amplified by the loss and pressures that are forced upon him. He is prone to depressive episodes, particularly during the Weeping, in Shadesmar, or in prison—places with little to no sunlight. Despite the outward confidence he is often able to show, he often feels like a failure, focusing on the many deaths that he feels he could have prevented. During these times, he feels morose and chapters from his point of view describe that he was feeling "gray" and morose spiraling farther into depression. Kaladin draws a black and white distinction between lighteyes and darkeyes, harboring a deep resentment and distrust for virtually all lighteyes, fueled by the betrayals of people like Roshone, Amaram, and Katarotam. Ironically, Kaladin himself is noted to have many lighteyed qualities. Many characters remark that Kaladin has the bearing of a lighteyes—meaning a leader or noble, since the term "lighteyes" encompasses these qualities in the Alethi language—and others have noted that "Kaladin" sounds like a lighteyed name, rather than a darkeyed name. Further, when Kaladin comes into his true power as a Knight Radiant, he becomes lighteyed. Kaladin despises these qualities in himself, because they make him more similar to lighteyes. Due to his recent struggles, Kaladin shows hostility and resentment, although at times his wit, sarcasm, and intelligence show through. He appears to have got his sense of humor from his mother and is constantly questioning the world around him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Personality', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3cccc29f-e064-4a8f-a7f0-f26755cf8a0a'}, page_content="Kaladin - He dislikes beards, finding the way that they itch at the corner of his mouth to be annoying. Due to this, he tries to shave his own whenever he can. He finds the Vorin insistence on gender norms to be ridiculous and doesn't expect anyone to live up to them, questioning why people mocked others, like Renarin, for not being the traditional masculine ideal."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Personality', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3cccc29f-e064-4a8f-a7f0-f26755cf8a0a'}, page_content="Kaladin - However, he does seem to still believe in them and the dichotomy they enforce on how one's role in society, he simply doesn't enforce them himself. While Kaladin is accepting of gay people such as Drehy, he considers them to be unmasculine, and considers Drehy's own beliefs in Vorin gender norms to be funny considering his sexuality. However, this doesn't lead him to acting in a bigoted manner against gay men, and even apologizes when he winds up insulting them. This can be traced back to how Vorin society in general accepts it due to their focus on oaths; mixed with the beliefs in very strict gender norms, which, while Kaladin does not fully buy into them, do influence the way he sees the world. These two factors can be seen as shaping his views on homosexuality."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f990e853-b298-42f0-8acf-c422bfa4c6d0'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Attributes and Abilities \n\n Surgebinding \nKaladin has the ability to manipulate the Surges of Adhesion and Gravitation through his Nahel bond with the honorspren Sylphrena. By breathing in Stormlight, he gains superhuman strength, speed, agility, durability, stamina, and healing. While his honorspren is present with him, his movements are enhanced by her, which Kaladin describes as "being guided by the wind." This gives Kaladin a superior natural fighting talent, although it does not replace skill by itself. Kaladin often refers to his powers as the Three Lashings. The Full Lashing is sticking objects together with Adhesion. It is the first of the Three Lashings Kaladin mastered, as it is the easiest to perform. He can use this Lashing to bond rocks to a sheer chasm wall and create a ladder, and similarly to use brushes as portable handholds for climbing. He also uses the Full Lashing to disarm his opponents by yanking their weapons with his own and neutralize them by bonding them to surfaces while sparring. Full Lashings cannot affect a Radiant\'s skin, but they can affect hair and clothing. Basic Lashings involve manipulating Gravitation to make an object or person fall in a different direction. After his encounter with the Assassin in White, Kaladin manages to duplicate the ability to perform Basic Lashings. He has since learned how to perform multiple Lashings on a single object, as well as partial Lashings. He is able to fly by Lashing himself into the air, and has gotten quite good at instinctively dismissing and renewing Lashings in different directions to achieve complex maneuvers such as looping and banking. He can also use this ability to transport people over long distances by Lashing both themselves and himself multiple times in a direction. He typically does this while over the highstorm so as to avoid running out of Light. The Reverse Lashing is the most Intent-centered Lashing of the three, and as such is generally more difficult to use. It involves infusing an object and commanding it to attract a specific other object. Kaladin unconsciously performs this Lashing during the bridge runs for the entirety of his time as a bridgeman, infusing the bridge he carries to attract the Parshendi arrows being shot at him while approaching the target plateaus. Later at the Battle of the Tower, he infuses the shield he is carrying to draw an entire volley of arrows shot at Bridge Four. He also uses this Lashing to rip The Pursuer\'s head from his body. In addition to the Lashings, Kaladin is able to use his Surges to create a pocket of calm within a highstorm. This manifests as a barrier of windspren. Resonance \nAs a Knight Radiant who has access to two Surges he also has a resonance. Windrunners, such as Kaladin, have an increased number of squires, more than any other Order. The squires are also more powerful than those of the other Orders. Shardwielding \nAfter Kaladin swears the Third Ideal of the Windrunners, Sylphrena gains the ability to become a Shardblade. Kaladin can summon her in the form of any weapon he chooses, as well as a shield, and transform it from one to another almost instantaneously. His preferred weapon for fighting is a spear, but he usually summons Syl in her default Blade shape when showing her off. Later, the Fourth Ideal allows him to additionally summon windspren and manifest them in the Physical Realm as Shardplate. His Plate glows blue at the seams, and is emblazoned  with the glyph of Bridge Four on the chest. The spren that can create it are always present nearby, though not always manifest; this allows Kaladin to summon it at a moment\'s notice. He can also send it out to manifest on other people and protect them this way. Combat Skills \n\nDuring his time in Amaram\'s army, Kaladin\'s natural talent blossoms him into a master at spear-fighting. He is the quickest learner among the members of his cohort. His effortless ability surprises his drill sergeant, Tukks. Kaladin spends the year after his brother\'s death driving himself to exhaustion each day at the practice yard. He eventually grows to be known as the best spearman in Amaram\'s army. He is able to take down six spearmen by himself in seconds, even before he discovers his abilities as a Surgebinder. Combined with Stormlight, he holds off dozens of Parshendi almost single-handedly. While the spear is his preferred weapon, Kaladin has training with other weapons as well. He often carries throwing knives as a secondary weapon and is able to use them with considerable accuracy. He has at various times wielded a quarterstaff, a hammer, and a halberd. After becoming the Kholin bodyguard, he starts training with the Swordmaster Zahel, though he is by no means an expert with a sword yet. Syl has also confirmed that Kaladin\'s preternatural skill with weapons, evident since the first time he picked up a quarterstaff as a boy, comes from their bond. Kaladin also possesses a capable mind as a military commander. He becomes the youngest squadleader in Amaram\'s army when he is eighteen years old. He manages to reduce the casualty rate of his squad to the lowest in the entire army. He is able to train Bridge Four with barely any resources.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f990e853-b298-42f0-8acf-c422bfa4c6d0'}, page_content='Kaladin - He is able to quickly analyze a battlefield and assess the tactical situation. Medicine \nKaladin starts training in medicine with his father and assisting him in surgery when he is eight years old. His training is mostly concentrated in, but not limited to, surgery.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f990e853-b298-42f0-8acf-c422bfa4c6d0'}, page_content='Kaladin - After joining the army, he gains considerable practice as a field medic, attending to his fellows soldiers injured in combat. He has some level of understanding of pharmacology, as he is able to harvest and extract his own antiseptic from knobweed sap.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f990e853-b298-42f0-8acf-c422bfa4c6d0'}, page_content='Kaladin - He also has a basic grasp of neurological disorders like epilepsy. Social Status \nKaladin has had a varied social standing throughout his life. His birth to Lirin, a darkeyed surgeon of the second nahn, sets him at second nahn originally. When he is branded a slave by Amaram, his rank changes to tenth nahn, like all slaves. When Dalinar rescues him and makes him captain of the Kholin guard, his nahn is uncertain, since captain is a rank usually given only to lower-dahn lighteyes.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f990e853-b298-42f0-8acf-c422bfa4c6d0'}, page_content="Kaladin - During this time, he is treated as an oddity outside of the normal caste system by many. Once Kaladin begins summoning Syl as a Shardblade, his eyes temporarily change to blue, making him a lighteyes, before fading back to brown, making him darkeyed again. Dalinar decides that his status as a Shardbearer makes him a lighteyes of the fourth dahn, regardless of his current eye color. Since fourth dahn is a landed title, Elhokar gives Kaladin a small piece of the Eastern Crownlands to rule over. This technically makes Kaladin a landed lord, despite him not actually having any control over his territory, as it is taken over by Voidbringers shortly before he obtains it. As Bridge Four grows into the refounded Order of Windrunners, Kaladin is promoted from captain to highmarshal. Shortly before the Fused occupation of Urithiru, Kaladin steps down, at Dalinar's request, and becomes a surgeon. His notoriety as Stormblessed and the high social status of Radiants make his effective status remain high, even if he is technically just a surgeon. He is reinstated briefly as highmarshal during the occupation, although he renounces command again upon the retaking of the tower."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgebinding', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '51c77104-5f7a-471b-ae5b-ee925efc8e6b'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Surgebinding \nKaladin has the ability to manipulate the Surges of Adhesion and Gravitation through his Nahel bond with the honorspren Sylphrena. By breathing in Stormlight, he gains superhuman strength, speed, agility, durability, stamina, and healing. While his honorspren is present with him, his movements are enhanced by her, which Kaladin describes as "being guided by the wind." This gives Kaladin a superior natural fighting talent, although it does not replace skill by itself. Kaladin often refers to his powers as the Three Lashings. The Full Lashing is sticking objects together with Adhesion. It is the first of the Three Lashings Kaladin mastered, as it is the easiest to perform. He can use this Lashing to bond rocks to a sheer chasm wall and create a ladder, and similarly to use brushes as portable handholds for climbing.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgebinding', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '51c77104-5f7a-471b-ae5b-ee925efc8e6b'}, page_content="Kaladin - He also uses the Full Lashing to disarm his opponents by yanking their weapons with his own and neutralize them by bonding them to surfaces while sparring. Full Lashings cannot affect a Radiant's skin, but they can affect hair and clothing. Basic Lashings involve manipulating Gravitation to make an object or person fall in a different direction."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgebinding', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '51c77104-5f7a-471b-ae5b-ee925efc8e6b'}, page_content="Kaladin - After his encounter with the Assassin in White, Kaladin manages to duplicate the ability to perform Basic Lashings. He has since learned how to perform multiple Lashings on a single object, as well as partial Lashings. He is able to fly by Lashing himself into the air, and has gotten quite good at instinctively dismissing and renewing Lashings in different directions to achieve complex maneuvers such as looping and banking. He can also use this ability to transport people over long distances by Lashing both themselves and himself multiple times in a direction. He typically does this while over the highstorm so as to avoid running out of Light. The Reverse Lashing is the most Intent-centered Lashing of the three, and as such is generally more difficult to use. It involves infusing an object and commanding it to attract a specific other object. Kaladin unconsciously performs this Lashing during the bridge runs for the entirety of his time as a bridgeman, infusing the bridge he carries to attract the Parshendi arrows being shot at him while approaching the target plateaus. Later at the Battle of the Tower, he infuses the shield he is carrying to draw an entire volley of arrows shot at Bridge Four. He also uses this Lashing to rip The Pursuer's head from his body. In addition to the Lashings, Kaladin is able to use his Surges to create a pocket of calm within a highstorm. This manifests as a barrier of windspren. Resonance \nAs a Knight Radiant who has access to two Surges he also has a resonance. Windrunners, such as Kaladin, have an increased number of squires, more than any other Order. The squires are also more powerful than those of the other Orders."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Resonance', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5a9f4ea7-e0da-4dcf-b966-545deb938989'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Resonance \nAs a Knight Radiant who has access to two Surges he also has a resonance. Windrunners, such as Kaladin, have an increased number of squires, more than any other Order.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Resonance', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5a9f4ea7-e0da-4dcf-b966-545deb938989'}, page_content='Kaladin - The squires are also more powerful than those of the other Orders.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Shardwielding', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4af401b6-f927-47fd-a4eb-28eb77199aae'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Shardwielding \nAfter Kaladin swears the Third Ideal of the Windrunners, Sylphrena gains the ability to become a Shardblade. Kaladin can summon her in the form of any weapon he chooses, as well as a shield, and transform it from one to another almost instantaneously. His preferred weapon for fighting is a spear, but he usually summons Syl in her default Blade shape when showing her off. Later, the Fourth Ideal allows him to additionally summon windspren and manifest them in the Physical Realm as Shardplate.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Shardwielding', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4af401b6-f927-47fd-a4eb-28eb77199aae'}, page_content="Kaladin - His Plate glows blue at the seams, and is emblazoned  with the glyph of Bridge Four on the chest. The spren that can create it are always present nearby, though not always manifest; this allows Kaladin to summon it at a moment's notice. He can also send it out to manifest on other people and protect them this way."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Combat Skills', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '072bf2f8-1d94-4042-8249-1909049ad777'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Combat Skills \n\nDuring his time in Amaram's army, Kaladin's natural talent blossoms him into a master at spear-fighting. He is the quickest learner among the members of his cohort. His effortless ability surprises his drill sergeant, Tukks. Kaladin spends the year after his brother's death driving himself to exhaustion each day at the practice yard. He eventually grows to be known as the best spearman in Amaram's army. He is able to take down six spearmen by himself in seconds, even before he discovers his abilities as a Surgebinder. Combined with Stormlight, he holds off dozens of Parshendi almost single-handedly. While the spear is his preferred weapon, Kaladin has training with other weapons as well. He often carries throwing knives as a secondary weapon and is able to use them with considerable accuracy. He has at various times wielded a quarterstaff, a hammer, and a halberd. After becoming the Kholin bodyguard, he starts training with the Swordmaster Zahel, though he is by no means an expert with a sword yet. Syl has also confirmed that Kaladin's preternatural skill with weapons, evident since the first time he picked up a quarterstaff as a boy, comes from their bond. Kaladin also possesses a capable mind as a military commander. He becomes the youngest squadleader in Amaram's army when he is eighteen years old. He manages to reduce the casualty rate of his squad to the lowest in the entire army."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Combat Skills', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '072bf2f8-1d94-4042-8249-1909049ad777'}, page_content='Kaladin - He is able to train Bridge Four with barely any resources. He is able to quickly analyze a battlefield and assess the tactical situation.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Medicine', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f45c1011-7390-4023-b580-225a58313c8f'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Medicine \nKaladin starts training in medicine with his father and assisting him in surgery when he is eight years old. His training is mostly concentrated in, but not limited to, surgery.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Medicine', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f45c1011-7390-4023-b580-225a58313c8f'}, page_content='Kaladin - After joining the army, he gains considerable practice as a field medic, attending to his fellows soldiers injured in combat. He has some level of understanding of pharmacology, as he is able to harvest and extract his own antiseptic from knobweed sap. He also has a basic grasp of neurological disorders like epilepsy.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Social Status', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '11f449a0-e95f-44fd-8840-db7d9bda9840'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Social Status \nKaladin has had a varied social standing throughout his life. His birth to Lirin, a darkeyed surgeon of the second nahn, sets him at second nahn originally. When he is branded a slave by Amaram, his rank changes to tenth nahn, like all slaves. When Dalinar rescues him and makes him captain of the Kholin guard, his nahn is uncertain, since captain is a rank usually given only to lower-dahn lighteyes.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Social Status', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '11f449a0-e95f-44fd-8840-db7d9bda9840'}, page_content="Kaladin - During this time, he is treated as an oddity outside of the normal caste system by many. Once Kaladin begins summoning Syl as a Shardblade, his eyes temporarily change to blue, making him a lighteyes, before fading back to brown, making him darkeyed again. Dalinar decides that his status as a Shardbearer makes him a lighteyes of the fourth dahn, regardless of his current eye color. Since fourth dahn is a landed title, Elhokar gives Kaladin a small piece of the Eastern Crownlands to rule over. This technically makes Kaladin a landed lord, despite him not actually having any control over his territory, as it is taken over by Voidbringers shortly before he obtains it. As Bridge Four grows into the refounded Order of Windrunners, Kaladin is promoted from captain to highmarshal. Shortly before the Fused occupation of Urithiru, Kaladin steps down, at Dalinar's request, and becomes a surgeon. His notoriety as Stormblessed and the high social status of Radiants make his effective status remain high, even if he is technically just a surgeon. He is reinstated briefly as highmarshal during the occupation, although he renounces command again upon the retaking of the tower."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin -  History \n Early Life (1153-1168) \n Early childhood \n\nKaladin was born in late 1153 to Lirin and Hesina, a family of second nahn, in the town of Hearthstone in Torol Sadeas' princedom in northwestern Alethkar. His younger brother, Tien was born two years later. Growing up, Kaladin preferred the shorter name Kal to his full name, which he felt sounded like a lighteyes’s name. At the age of eight, Kal began training with his father in surgery, though he dreamed of becoming a soldier."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - At first, he became sick at the sight of wounds and injuries.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Over the next couple of years, he grew used to the sight and assisted his father during surgeries which he figured would come in handy on the battlefield. However, the amount of time Lirin spent with books and sick people, coupled with their class disparity, made people uncomfortable to be around Lirin and Kal, by association. As a result of his isolated upbringing, Kal became very close with his brother and, at the encouragement of his parents, Laral Wistiow, the daughter of the citylord. Surgeon or Soldier \nIn , Kal assisted his father in amputating one of the fingers of a fifteen-year old girl named Sani. Once finished, Lirin asked Kal why he was late. Kal admitted it was because he went with Tien to see what Jam, a boy two years older, had learned from his quarterstaff training. Kal was excited because Jam’s father was a soldier in Brightlord Amaram’s army. Lirin replied that he knew Jam’s father, having operated on his leg three times, a “gift” from his time as a soldier. Kal argued they needed soldiers, but Lirin claimed they needed surgeons more. Lirin doubted that his son could actually hurt someone as he cried nearly every time someone was brought to them. Kal promised he would get stronger causing Lirin to ask who put these ideas in his head. Kal countered that it was about honor and that no one told stories about surgeons. Lirin told him there were two kinds of people in the world, those who save lives and those who take lives, that one couldn’t protect by killing. Lirin then informed Kal that once he turned sixteen, he wanted to send Kaladin to train with real surgeons in Kharbranth. Lirin told Kal he had a gift from the Heralds and he didn’t need to waste it on the small dreams of other men. Two years later, Kal and Laral were talking somewhere east of Hearthstone while Tien gathered rocks nearby. Kal told her of his father’s plans to send him to Kharbranth to train to become a surgeon. Hurt, Laral asked why he hadn’t told her. He lied, saying he didn’t think his father was serious. Laral wondered about his previous plans to be a soldier. His expression became gloomy as he was conflicted on which path to choose, surgeon or soldier. Sensing his distress, Tien ran up to Kal with a rock that he found, giving it to Kal to make him feel better. Kal did feel better and went with Tien to find a lurg. Laral rejoined them, commenting that Tien changed Kal for the better. Laral continued to encourage Kal to become a soldier, and that he shouldn't let his father force him to do something he didn't want to. She even implied he could marry her if he won a Shardblade. Kal replied he still had time to decide as they wouldn't take him until he was sixteen. Later, they encountered a group of older boys, one of whom made the claim his father won a Shardblade in the wastescum skirmishes. At Laral’s prompting, Kal contradicted him, which led to the boy, Jost, challenging Kal to a quarterstaff fight. Although it was his first time holding a weapon, his natural talent for combat manifested. However, seeing that he hurt Jost, he stopped himself from fighting anymore."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Jost, having no similar inhibition, beat Kal to the ground. Kal then asked Jost to teach him, but the older boy declined, telling Kal to “go be what you are.” Joined by Tien, Kal made his way home, where Lirin informed Kal that Citylord Wistiow had died and bequeathed a goblet full of spheres to Kal so he could study in Kharbranth. Two months later, thirteen-year-old Kal attempted to treat a five-year-old girl named Miasal on his own. Kal started treating her, but it was too late as Miasal died from blood loss due to multiple severe wounds. An hour later, his father found Kal in front of the surgery room crying to himself. Lirin told him that he was proud of Kal’s work and there was nothing he could have done to stop Miasal’s death. Kal confessed to Lirin that he doesn’t want to be a surgeon, but Lirin just answered that he would have to learn when to care. Near the end of , Kal was walking through the city of Hearthstone when he overheard two women claiming that his father stole the spheres from Citylord Wistiow upon his death. Gritting his teeth and knowing that was his father, Kal stepped out of the alleyway and gave one of the women a sharp look, causing both to flee inside the bakery. His satisfaction was short-lived as he didn’t understand why people said such things about his father.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - He was still stewing when he turned a few corners, walking to where his mother stood on a stepladder. When Hesina asked about his lessons, he blurted out that everyone hated his father and that they believed he stole the spheres from Wistiow. He also lamented that he didn’t have friends and asked what would happen if he wanted to become something other than a surgeon. Hesina reminded him that he had Tien and that he shouldn’t be so quick to discard his studies because he wanted to be like the others. She also told him not to hate the townspeople as they were just repeating what they had heard. Seeing her glance to the citylord’s manor, Kal debated whether or not he should try to see Laral again. Each time he had tried, he’d been turned away by her nurse. He wondered what it would be like marrying Laral and if he did, would he always feel inferior to her. He was still considering this fact and debating whether or not to be a surgeon or a soldier when Lirin ran in declaring the new citylord had arrived. Desperate times \nKal went with his parents to the town square to await the arrival of Citylord Roshone. Tien was already there, having already picked out a spot.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - As Tien ran by, some older boys made an unintelligible remark about him which made Kal furious, wanting to confront them, but knowing it wasn’t a good time. Kal joined Tien to view the procession of a dozen wagons and a carriage. The carriage stopped and a middle-aged man stepped out.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - The lighteyed man scanned the crowd with a distasteful look on his face before turning to climb back into his carriage without addressing the crowd. Before he could, Lirin called out, trying to welcome him to Hearthstone, introducing himself as the town’s surgeon. Roshone responded by blaming Lirin as the reason he ended up in “this pitiful miserable quarter of the kingdom.”\n\nCitylord Roshone’s arrival brought great misfortune to Kal’s family. Believing that Lirin had stolen the spheres from Wistiow, he coerced the townspeople to stop making donations for Lirin’s work, which was the primary source of the family’s income. While the townsfolk acquiesced, they still secretly provided provisions to Lirin and Hesina. One night while drunk, Lirin told his son not to make the same mistakes he did and get sucked back into this tiny, foolish town. Kal argued that Lirin had always told him to come back, but Lirin admitted he’d been an idiot when he said that, adding that the townspeople didn’t want him there. Kal asked him why they couldn’t just spend the spheres, but his father said the spheres were for his education. Besides, if they did spend them, they would be doing exactly what Roshone wanted them to do. Instead, they did the best with what they had with Kal continuing his studies, Hesina taking on random jobs, and Tien apprenticing with Ral, a carpenter in town.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - At the same time, Kal was secretly still trying to decide what path he would take in the next several months, that of a surgeon or a spearman. A series of thumps interrupted Kal’s thoughts, sending him scrambling out of his chair. His father pulled open the door revealing not a monster, but three masked men demanding the spheres. However, they weren’t the highwaymen as Kaladin initially thought, but rather Luten, Horl, and Balsas, normal townsmen presumably hired by Roshone. Ashamed and caught off guard, the men left without taking anything.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Half a year later, Roshone invited Lirin to the mansion for dinner. Although Lirin and Hesina tried to hide the meeting from him, Kal found out and attended, wanting to support his father if he confronted the citylord. As they rode through the city, Kal asked his father why they tried to hide the meeting. Lirin admitted that he wasn’t sure if he even wanted to attend as a part of him just wanted to take the family and flee to Kharbranth or another Alethi town. Lirin confessed that he had tried to leave once, but there was a tie between a man’s heart and his home and he couldn’t bring himself to leave. Having cared for the townspeople for so long, he couldn’t leave them in the hands of Roshone. Once they arrived, the pair were led to a dining room where Roshone was already eating. A servant gestured to a side table set up in a room off the main dining hall, but Lirin sat down at Roshone’s table insisting that he was of second nahn and surely he could have a place at his table. Not wasting any time, Roshone discussed their present situation and asked them to return the spheres, ending their defiance. When Kal responded with an outburst, Lirin sent him away to the kitchens. There, Roshone’s son, Rillir walked in with Laral, and confusing Kaladin for a servant, ordered him to fetch their supper. Kal, protesting that he wasn’t a servant, lost an argument over his calling with Rillir, leaving him humiliated. As Lirin and Kal left the mansion, the latter admitted to his father that he had been considering joining the army. However, he had resolved to becoming a surgeon so that he would have the education to stand up to the lighteyes. During their conversation, Kal saw something unfamiliar in his father’s eyes, guilt. He then realized that Lirin had indeed stolen the spheres from Wistiow, changing everything, but also changing nothing. He resolved to use the spheres for his training, but would eventually pay them back to Laral. Somebody has to start \n\nWhile on a hunting trip, Roshone and Rillir were seriously injured by a whitespine and brought to Lirin’s surgery room. Kaladin and Lirin determined that Rillir’s injuries were already fatal and tended to Roshone despite his protests. They anesthetized both patients, Roshone for surgery and Rillir for mercy. During the procedure, Lirin hesitated when he discovered a piece of the whitespine’s tusk near Roshone’s femoral artery. Kaladin considered how easy it would be to fake an accident, but they continued on to save Roshone’s life as Rillir died. When Kaladin asked his father why he did not let Roshone die, Lirin answered that they have to be better men than the lighteyes. A decision made \nIn the Weeping of , Kaladin found himself increasingly hoping for the sun and the wind again, the weather making it difficult for him to get things done. One day, when Kaladin was lying on the roof during the rain after repairing a leak, Tien called up to him, wanting to join him. While Kaladin didn’t think anyone else could cheer him up, he knew Tien could because somehow he just always knew the right thing to do. At first, it was just the two of them sitting in silence. Then, Tien presented Kaladin with a gift, an intricately carved horse that he made at Ral’s shop. Kaladin asked if he showed the beautiful horse to Ral, but Tien confessed that it got him into trouble because it wasn’t useful. Not a bit discouraged, Tien said he would make him proud tomorrow by finishing a chair. Kaladin found himself amazed at his brother’s ability to smile even in the darkest of times, swearing things grew brighter around them in that moment. However, it was short-lived as Kaladin admitted his concerns about their father having to spend the spheres to not only Tien, but also his mother. Hesina promised him that there would be enough spheres for him to go to Kharbranth in two months. Kaladin suggested that perhaps the entire family should come with him, not wanting to leave them behind, especially with Roshone “strangling” them. Hesina informed Kaladin that they only spent the spheres to make Roshone think he was winning, not because they needed to. Once Kaladin left, the spheres would be safe in the hands of the ardents while he studied to become a surgeon. However, Hesina reminded him that that his life was his own and that he didn’t have to become a surgeon to make them proud. They sat for awhile, Kaladin considering her words and what Tien could possibly like about the rain, when Lirin came with news that there was a gathering in the square. Roshone assembled the townsfolk as Meridas Amaram, a general for Highprince Sadeas, had arrived in Hearthstone to recruit soldiers for the army. There, Kaladin and his family were shocked to learn that Laral was now engaged to Roshone himself after Rillir’s death. Meanwhile, since only six men had volunteered, Amaram asked Roshone to announce the list of conscripts. As citylord, Roshone was barred from placing Lirin or Kaladin on the conscription list because they served a vital function to the town. However, Roshone placed Tien’s name on the list instead. When Kaladin tried to take his brother’s place, he was denied because the law gave the choice to Roshone alone. Left with no other option, Kaladin enlisted in the army in order to protect Tien and promised his devastated parents that he would bring Tien back safely in four years. Amaram also promised Lirin that he would make Tien a messenger boy for a while. Amaram's Army (1168-1172) \n Natural talent \nKaladin received his initial training under Tukks, who taught him the importance of controlled passion—to be passionate and to care without losing control of his emotions—a lesson that he did not initially understand. During his training, Kaladin demonstrated a natural aptitude for being a soldier, learning the spear faster than anyone else in his cohort, barely even needing instruction, much to Tukks’ surprise. After freezing on the battle field the first time, Kaladin was assigned cleaning duty by Tukks. Not to punish him, but to help him fit in more."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Tukks explained about how many soldiers struggle with the need to hurt the enemy. However, Kaladin didn't believe he froze because he was afraid to hurt someone, but because he realized he could kill, if needed. Tien's Death \n\nDespite Amaram’s promise to Lirin, the older messenger boys, including Tien, were soon organized into several squads of reserve units to make up for a shortfall in recruitment. Dalar assured Kaladin that these squads would not see combat unless the army was in serious danger. Less than four months after his enlistment, Kaladin took part in his third real battle. Amaram’s army was attempting to hold a hilltop, but as the battle deteriorated, messenger boys were assigned to Sheler's company. Hearing that the messenger squad was sent to the front, Kaladin ran recklessly through the battlefield in an attempt to reach his brother. On the southeast side of the hill, Squadleader Varth placed Tien and two other boys in the front lines, successfully using them as bait. Kaladin, killing a man for the first time during his run, reached Tien only after he had been killed. Weeping and bleeding from wounds taken during his run, he hugged Tien’s dead body until long past the end of the battle. Stormblessed \nKaladin sent a letter to his parents informing them of Tien’s death and his decision not to return to Hearthstone. He spent the next year driving himself to exhaustion every day on the practice yard, vowing vengeance and never letting another person die because of his lack of skill. He became the best spearman in his company and was rumored to be the best in the entire army. He eventually met Tarah, the daughter of an assistant quartermaster, who coaxed Kaladin out of his single-mindedness, claiming it would burn him out. The two became romantically involved, but they separated soon after she was transferred to a scribe’s job in Mourn’s Vault. Kaladin blamed himself for their failed relationship, knowing that he’d been stupid not to send responses to her letters. He later joined the Takers under Tukks' leadership. There, Kaladin met Durk, who became a mentor to him. Durk was impressed with Kaladin’s abilities, considering him a natural born soldier, an artist with a spear. Unfortunately, every member of the Takers was eventually killed with Kaladin being the lone survivor. At the age of eighteen, Kaladin was promoted to squadleader, making him the youngest one in the army and became known as Kaladin Stormblessed. Fighting the Shardbearer \nOne year after becoming a Squadleader, in , Kaladin fought his final battle in Amaram’s army. Prior to the battle, Kaladin met with a Squadleader Gare and two of his sergeants. Kaladin bribed Gare to transfer Cenn, a young and inexperienced soldier, to Kaladin’s own squad, whom he entrusted to his sergeant Dallet. He also bribed the surgeons to give priority to his men. While bribing the surgeons, the money pouch stuck to his hand by what Kaladin assumed to be a windspren, although it was actually his first meeting with Sylphrena. After consulting with Dallet, Kaladin went to the front lines to prepare for battle. Once the signal to march was given, Kaladin’s well-disciplined squad used non-standard tactics to avoid taking any casualties. However, the larger battle didn’t go nearly as well. When the larger body of Amaram’s forces broke, Kaladin’s squad was left in the middle of the enemy. During the chaos, Kaladin single-handedly defeated six men to save Cenn, who had been stranded alone without the rest of the squad. After treating Cenn, Kaladin saw an enemy battalionlord and decided to kill him, hoping such a feat would get him transferred to the Shattered Plains, where Kaladin believed the real fight and honorable men can be found. Kaladin and two of his subsquads executed their plan flawlessly, with Kaladin himself landing the killing blow on the enemy battalionlord. Immediately after, an unknown enemy, a full Shardbearer, later revealed to be Helaran Davar, appeared and cut through Amaram’s army, killing Cenn, Dallet, and two more of Kaladin's men. Helaran continued on to attack Amaram, whose honor guard had abandoned him. Enraged, Kaladin and his twenty remaining men chased after Helaran. Helaran killed sixteen of Kaladin’s men before Kaladin finally managed to kill him, saving Amaram’s life. Amaram and Coreb, one of Kaladin's men, urged Kaladin to claim Helaran’s Shards, as it was his right to do so by ancient tradition. However, Kaladin was disgusted by the thought of wielding the same Blade that claimed the lives of so many of his friends. Instead, Kaladin gave the Shards to Coreb and walked away. Betrayal \n\nA few hours later, Kaladin was called to Amaram’s warcenter, where he met Amaram and a group of his men along with the four surviving members of his squad. After a short conversation, Amaram and his men ambushed Kaladin, killing the surviving members of Kaladin’s squad while Kaladin himself was restrained. Amaram apologized but said this was the only way to ensure secrecy. He informed Kaladin that he had thought it over for hours before finally being convinced by Restares that the best interests of Alethkar would served if he wielded the Shards himself. As an act of mercy and gratitude, Amaram spared Kaladin’s life and branded him with the “sas nahn” glyphpair to mark him as a slave to be sold. Slavery (1172-1173) \n Defiance \nKaladin spent the next eight months under at least six different slavemasters, including a man named Katarotam, suffering from constant and squalid conditions. Initially, Kaladin was defiant, making ten escape attempts. Although several of them were successful, he always ended up getting re-captured. In his tenth escape attempt, he led a group of twenty armed slaves, including a man named Goshel. However, they all died, leaving Kaladin to believe he failed them. By the eighth month, Kaladin fell into despair and stopped making any escape attempts. Though he should have been killed for his tenth escape attempt, Kaladin’s master found him “intriguing,” and branded his forehead with the shash glyph, meaning “dangerous”, and sold him. Eventually, Kaladin was bought by Tvlakv and it was during this time that Kaladin hit his lowest point. He found and hid away some poisonous blackbane leaves, unsure of whether or not he wanted to use them to commit suicide, kill his master, or something else. Regardless, he took comfort in having options open to him. However, when a fellow slave took ill, Kaladin’s instinct to protect and heal re-emerged and Kaladin attempted to save his life. His attempts failed as Tvlakv had the slave killed in order to avoid the infection spreading. Sylphrena \nIt was during this time that Kaladin first noticed Sylphrena. Though she’d been following him for several months, Kaladin believed her to be nothing more than the average, albeit mischievous windspren. As Kaladin was rubbing the blackbane leaves between his fingers, Syl asked him what he had. At first, he ignored her, but not without noticing some oddities about her, such as the exceptionally long period of time that she had been following him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - When she called him by name, he was shocked as he didn’t believe that spren could use people’s names. To his knowledge, spren could mimic voices or expressions, but they didn’t have actual intelligence or memory. Kaladin thought he was insane at first, but he eventually started to converse with Syl. During the course of their first conversation, Syl asked Kaladin why he didn’t fight like he used to. Kaladin continued to question how she knew both his name and what he did weeks ago. He finally confessed to her that he had failed, remembering the deaths of Tien, Cenn, Dallet, Tukks, and the Takers. After the slave took ill and Tvlakv had him killed, Syl asked Kaladin why he didn’t cry. Kaladin replied that it wouldn’t change anything and maybe she should ask the Almighty why men cry. During a storm, Syl chased after it, but eventually returned. Kaladin wondered why she didn’t go with the other windspren, but she told him she liked it there with him. Finding the way after all \nDays passed and the wagons continued to roll on until one particular day when they didn’t stop at their usual time, leaving Kaladin to wonder why they hadn’t stopped for their afternoon slop. Well past noon, they finally rolled to a stop and Bluth and Tag joined Tvlakv. The three quickly started arguing as they held up a piece of paper. Kaladin called out, asking Tvlakv if he was lost and offered that perhaps he should seek guidance from the Almighty who had a “fondness” for slavers. Tvlakv walked over and asked Kaladin if he knew anything of the area. Kaladin requested the map and without even reading it, he ripped it into pieces, much to Tvlakv’s horror. Tvlakv called for the mercenaries, but both Bluth and Tag declined to intervene. Realizing that Kaladin was probably invaluable at that point, Tvlakv asked what the former wanted in exchange for guiding the caravan. Kaladin suggested a cliff, not for a vantage point as Tvlakv assumed, but one to throw the slaver off of. Annoyed, Tvlakv told Kaladin it was good that he was fueled by hatred because it would make him strong, but cautioned that it could keep him from getting vengeance. Kaladin countered, saying he didn’t want vengeance as he learned a long time ago it didn’t work. Tvlakv argued that Kaladin was young still and that he could escape his fate and hunt down the man who sold him into slavery, Highlord Amaram. Shocked, Kaladin asked how Tvlakv knew about Amaram, but the slaver just said men talk. Though Tvlakv knew the truth about Kaladin’s brands, he told the younger man that they both had to play the game for now to avoid an even worse fate. However, they were at crossroads because Kaladin had left the map in shreds. Kaladin admitted he had never been this way so he didn’t know where to go. As Tvlakv walked away, Kaladin cursed, realizing he almost found himself liking the slaver. The wagons continued to roll on after their exchange, even through highstorms. Well before the end of one of them, Bluth lowered the sides of the wagon, allowing the rain to soak the slaves. Kaladin argued that it was too early to be taking down the sides, but Bluth stated that Tvlakv wanted them clean today. Realizing they were probably nearing their destination, Kaladin scanned the landscape wondering where they were going. Syl returned to tell Kaladin there were many others like him nearby. As she pointed eastward, Kaladin was shocked to see the enormous army encampment he’d heard stories about, the place Tien wanted to go in the end, the army he spent years trying to get into - The Shattered Plains. Bridgeman (1173) \n Bridge Four \nIn , Tvlakv sold Kaladin and the other slaves to Hashal, the wife of the lighteyed officer who was in charge of the slaves in Highprince Sadeas\'s army. She was not impressed with the slaves, but Kaladin stood out as he was still far more muscled than the others. When asked, Kaladin confirmed he used to be a spearman in Amaram\'s army. After inspecting his brands, and remarking that a "shash" glyph meant death, Hashal asked how he got here. Kaladin responded that he killed someone while drunk, and spoke of his talents with a spear and asked her to give him a chance to fight again in her brightlord’s army. However, Tvlakv told Hashal not to listen to him as he was a deserter, and could not be trusted as he had led rebellions before. Any slaves he might have had corrupted were assigned to be bridgemen while Kaladin was assigned specifically to Bridge Four, the bridge crew with the worst reputation and casualty rate. Kaladin was placed under the command of the bridge sergeant Gaz and was immediately forced to go on a bridge run completely unprepared and unequipped. Bridge Four was sent to carry a large bridge, allowing Sadeas\' soldiers to cross the plateaus of the Shattered Plains and assault the Parshendi. Gaz ran beside Bridge Four, calling out commands during the run due to their most recent bridgeleader having tossed himself down the Honor Chasm. He sent Kaladin to the open slot at the tail of the bridge. Without a vest, the wooden supports dug into Kaladin’s skin causing his shoulders to bleed. As they ran, a nearby bridgeman offered Kaladin advice. Eventually, Gaz called them to a stop and they lifted the bridge into place, allowing the army to pass. They repeated this process, with Kaladin eventually asking why they weren’t turning around. One of the other bridgemen just chuckled and told him they weren’t there yet and to be glad they weren’t. After more than a dozen times, Gaz ordered Kaladin to the front for the final push, declaring that newcomers get to go first. Kaladin quickly realized why arriving was the worst part. The Parshendi volleys launched, killing the men around Kaladin. They eventually got the bridge dropped, but at the expense of the bridgemen, resulting in many casualties. Kaladin just collapsed, knowing he should move or at least bind his wounds, but he just couldn’t, falling unconscious instead. Kaladin was about to be left for dead by the retreating bridge crews, until Syl called out his name and urged him to move. He forced himself to his feet and asked the windspren if she had a name. As he limped through the casualties, he found the body of the leathery faced man who had been nice to him. He harvested his vest and shoes, tying them on as the windspren introduced herself as Sylphrena. Honor Chasm \n\nOver next few weeks, Kaladin grew more and more depressed. Of the twenty-five men who had survived his first bridge deployment, twenty-three had died leaving only Kaladin and one other man. Bridge Four continued to be replenished, with many of those men dying to only to be replaced. They went through countless bridgeleaders, which typically was a favored position on a bridge crew, always getting to run in the best places. However, in Bridge Four, that didn’t matter. Kaladin didn’t bother to learn the names of the bridgemen as it just seemed pointless. One day, as they were working in the lumberyard, new recruits were brought in to be assigned to the bridge crews. Kaladin looked up and a young boy barely fourteen or fifteen caught his eye, reminding him of Tien. He had the same frightened eyes which immediately made Kaladin’s protective instinct kick in.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - However, all he could think of was how everyone he’d tried to protect ended up dead. Syl, unable to bear seeing Kaladin in such a hopeless state, decided to leave, afraid of what would happen to her if she stayed. On the next bridge run, the youth and the last man that survived Kaladin’s initial bridge run died, leaving Kaladin the senior member of Bridge Four. Faced with losing Syl, his only friend, and his inability to protect the boy, Kaladin seriously contemplated suicide. That night, he went to the Honor Chasm, intending to jump off. Before Kaladin could step off the ledge, Syl returned, excitedly carrying a leaf of blackbane with her. Syl, in her naivety, having seen Kaladin previously take heart in having the poisonous leaves with him, assumed they would make Kaladin feel better. Syl recalled how everything seemed to go wrong when he lost the leaves, how he used to fight and make his soldiers feel like family. She admitted that was one of the things that drew her to him to begin with. Kaladin just lamented that he failed, that everything he touches withers and dies. Syl pleaded with him to give it one more try, reminding him that he couldn’t hurt the bridgemen any worse.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Opening his eyes, he left the chasm and resolved himself to become bridgeleader.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - He marched up to Gaz and seized the man by the throat, sweeping his legs out from under him. Kaladin then intimidated and bribed the man into giving him the position along with the autonomy to run Bridge Four. Entering Bridge Four’s barrack that night, Kaladin found the men all huddled inside just as he left them. Kaladin visited with each man, introducing himself as bridgeleader and learning each of their names. Later, Kaladin went to sleep with a sense of purpose in protecting the men. Reforming Bridge Four \nThe next morning, Kaladin resolved to make some changes in Bridge Four. The first of these included training early in the mornings, putting an end to the group’s sleeping in. When Moash protested, Kaladin punched him in the gut and threw him over his shoulder, taking him outside. The others, shocked and not wanting to suffer the same fate, filed out into the sunlight. As Kaladin outlined his plan, he was immediately met with resistance from his fellow bridgemen who felt chores and bridge runs were more than enough to build their endurance. Kaladin argued that his primary duty was to keep them alive and since he couldn’t do anything about Parshendi arrows, he had to make them stronger. Moash called over to Gaz and asked if they had to listen to Kaladin to which Gaz replied that the bridgeleader only had authority on the field. Moash looked back to Kaladin and told him to storm off, causing the rest of the men to leave as well. Kaladin, undeterred by the men’s resistance, went off to the lumberyard to train by himself. He eventually attracted a crowd that included Teft, Rock, Dunny, and some of the other members of Bridge Four. Before the next bridge run, Kaladin visited an apothecary to purchase some supplies so he could tend to the wounded. However, he quickly discovered that antiseptic was expensive, despite knobweed reeds growing just outside of camp. Kaladin settled on a needle and gut as well as some bandages, spending the four marks he had left from paying Gaz off. Returning to camp just as the bells sounded, Kaladin yelled for the men to line up for the next bridge run. As the men neared the Parshendi lines, Kaladin demanded to switch with Rock, taking the most dangerous center-front spot of the bridge for himself, a rarity for a bridgeleader. During the assault, Kaladin was adamant on rescuing the six who fell. He dragged Hobber and Dabbid to safety with the help of Rock. As he turned to go back out to the field, Teft and Rock stopped him, going back to check on the other three. They returned with Leyten, the only other survivor. Kaladin quickly started to work, providing medical care to the wounded men. After the long battle, they returned to camp with their three wounded in tow much to Gaz’s protests. Because bridgemen were supposed to be expendable, Kaladin was told that he could keep tending to the wounded men, but they would not be paid or fed while they were unable to work. Not wanting to give in to Brightlord Sadeas, the bridgeleader asked other members of Bridge Four to pitch in money and food to care for the men. However, all refused except for Rock.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - He offered to share his food with Hobber, who was the least injured of the three. Knowing it would only be a matter of time before the rotspren were attracted to the wounded, Kaladin came up with the idea of collecting knobweed stems during stone-gathering detail. With the stems, he could create the antiseptic the men desperately needed and even sell some to get more supplies and food. Gaining the trust of Rock and Teft, Kaladin enlisted their help to find and collect the knobweed during their new detail. Syl assisted as well, finding patches of knobweed and guiding Rock—who was mysteriously able to see her—to them. While working to extract the sap that night, Kaladin started building camaraderie with the two men, even managing to get Rock to open up and share some of his life story. Kaladin returned to the apothecary and made a deal for his bridge crew to gather knobweed sap in return for a skymark per bottle of sap and some bandages. Upon returning from selling the sap, Gaz sent Bridge Four to do chasm duty, recovering valuables from the war dead who had fallen into the chasms. In the chasms, Kaladin continued to build rapport with the men, bringing Dunny into the fold, who sang for the men while others hovered behind. Through their work, Kaladin came across a spear in the chasms. Picking it up and holding it drew the ire of Moash, Sigzil, and Earless Jaks, who began taunting the bridgeleader. Ignoring their gibes, Kaladin closed his eyes and went into a trance. He performed an advanced practice kata with the spear, revealing his talent as a genius spearman to the men, leaving them speechless. This particular sequence would years later become known as the Chasm Kata. During the display, Teft, along with some of the other men, noticed an unknown spren—actually Syl—zipping around Kaladin. Through the rest of their chasm duty and on the walk back, more men started to open up. The night culminated in Kaladin using the money he had earned to purchase food and assigning Rock to cook a stew. Not a single person refused to partake in eating around the fire. The next day, a majority of the men followed his orders to rise out of bed and practice. Side Carry \nKaladin managed to get all the men to submit to his authority and participate in training. The training cut down on their losses, but Kaladin was still unsatisfied. Realizing that the bridge itself could act as a shield, Kaladin started training the men to shift the bridge and carry it on its side. The practice was slow going, which left Gaz pleased at the prospect of Bridge Four losing more members. Prior to the next bridge run, Kaladin gained Lopen as a member from a new batch of recruits. They were immediately sent the next run. Realizing it was going to be a difficult approach, Kaladin ordered Bridge Four to perform the side carry as they engaged the Parshendi. The side carry was a success as it completely protected Kaladin’s men. However, other bridge crews tried to emulate the side carry. Not having trained in the maneuver, the other bridge crews failed. Lacking a sufficient number of bridges to cross the chasms and with the timing of the assault desynchronized, the battle was thrown into chaos and  Sadeas lost. Understanding that he’d undermined the army’s strategy, Kaladin ordered Rock and Teft to stand down and Kaladin stepped up to Gaz and Lamaril to accept his fate. The Stormfather's Judgement\n\nAs punishment for the failure, Highprince Sadeas demoted several officers and executed Lamaril, the lighteyed officer directly in charge of the bridgemen. Sadeas declined to execute Kaladin directly, but instead decided to let the Stormfather judge him. Kaladin would be freed if he could survive being tied to the side of Bridge Four’s barrack during the highstorm. Prior to the highstorm, Rock, Teft, and Moash came to see Kaladin and promised they would remember him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin asked them to tell the men to come out after the storm and they will see that he had survived. Teft gave Kaladin a dun sphere for good luck and the men retreated into the barracks as the storm approached. As the storm raged and slammed into Kaladin, Syl told him to grab the roof and then the ring that his rope was attached to. He did as she said knowing that if he let go, he’d be dangling in the air again.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - However, the rain numbed his fingers and caused him to slip, flapping in the air again.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - As he hit the roof, everything went black and silent. During the darkness, Kaladin met the Stormfather in the form of a large, inhuman face. Immediately after, Kaladin’s Surgebinding abilities manifested and he drew upon Stormlight from the glowing blue sphere before falling unconscious. Kaladin Stormblessed \nAfter the highstorm, the bridgemen followed Rock and Teft to go check on Kaladin. The bridgeleader hung by his ankles, his skin sliced in a hundred places. Just as the men gathered around him horrified, Kaladin’s eyes snapped open. His hand dropped the sphere that had been given to him, now dun, shocking Teft who knew the sphere should be infused. Wanting answers, he told Kaladin he better survive and the men rushed to cut him down. They cared for him and posted a constant guard by his bed. His injuries were severe, even attracting Deathspren. While recovering, Teft brought three infused spheres telling Kaladin he couldn’t leave them. He watched as Kaladin unconsciously consumed the Stormlight, causing Teft to suspect he may be a member of the Knights Radiant. Ten days later, Kaladin made a miraculous recovery and his men, never having known of his previous army service, revived the name Kaladin Stormblessed. Transforming Bridge Four into spearmen \nAfter his recovery, Kaladin accompanied Bridge Four on their next bridge run. Once they dropped the bridge, Kaladin watched the battle raging on the next plateau alongside Rock and Sigzil. The latter asked why the bridgemen weren’t allowed to use shields during runs. Rock suggested that shields would slow them down, but Kaladin realized it was because they were bait. Kaladin slipped into despair as he realized there was no hope for his men. Things were compounded the next day when Kaladin met Matal, their new commander, and was re-acquainted with his wife, Hashal. She informed Kaladin that her husband would not run the bridge crews with the same laxness as his predecessor. Hashal then permanently assigned Bridge Four to chasm duty. Given the new orders and knowing their place as bait, Kaladin realized that further training as bridgemen would be a futile endeavor. Instead, he proposed training the men to become spearmen in order to escape, which his men accepted. During a highstorm, Kaladin dreamed he was the storm, traveling east to west, seeing the ground from the perspective of the storm itself. He passed over the Shattered Plains, the Sea of Spears, Kholinar, the Horneater Peaks, and countless other cities and villages. His path crossed Szeth’s in the middle of an assassination. Finally, he met the Stormfather once again, who left him with a cryptic message regarding the Oathpact being shattered and Odium reigning. Kaladin gasped awake to find himself being restrained. He attacked his “assailants,” but quickly realized they were just members of Bridge Four. They told him he had been in a fever dream and that he tried to walk out into the highstorm. Shaking off his vision, Kaladin went to clean up, even letting Rock give him a shave. Later that day, Bridge Four was given a new recruit, a parshman that Kaladin named Shen. Kaladin found himself walking around Sadeas’ warcamp an hour later, still worried about his dream. He asked Syl if she knew anything about Odium, which caused her to hiss and flee immediately to a nearby building. Before he could ask why the word set her off, Kaladin heard a series of curses behind him. Turning, Kaladin witnessed Adolin Kholin saving a prostitute from being beaten by a lighteyed officer. Choosing to escort the prostitute to the border, Adolin threw an emerald chip to Kaladin and told him to deliver a message that he couldn’t make his meeting and would reschedule. Kaladin took the money, but didn’t deliver the message due to his disdain of Adolin’s attitude and lighteyes in general. Syl returned, but was distressed at Kaladin’s increasingly dark attitude concerning lighteyes and his breach of the implicit agreement to do as Adolin asked. During their chasm duty detail, Kaladin secretly began training Bridge Four, which had now dwindled to twenty-four members, as spearmen. To assist with the training, Kaladin tricked Teft into revealing that he had been a soldier and appointed him to oversee the men. To maintain their cover of working in the chasms, he assigned Lopen, Rock, Dabbid, and Shen to do the actual salvage work with Syl’s assistance. Kaladin was impressed at the men’s progress after only a few hours and remarked that thanks to their adverse conditions, they were ironically the most motivated and fit recruits he had ever seen. In one of the next bridge runs, Dunny was killed. Frustrated, Kaladin began rescuing members from other bridge crews, commanding his men to carry them back to the barracks despite barely having enough resources to care for his own men. Kaladin’s actions coupled with the fact that the arrows seemed to dodge him when he ran point further raised Teft’s suspicions about the bridgeleader being a Knight Radiant. During chasm duty a week after Dunny’s passing, Bridge Four found slightly more than an emerald broam’s worth of money, including an actual emerald broam. With the money, they realized they could not only feed and care for the wounded bridgemen, but they could also advance their escape plan. Kaladin decided to turn over the emerald broam—an amount of money that no bridgeman could ever safely spend—but kept the rest. Rock, though an avowed pacifist, took up a bow and attached the pouch to the underside of one of the permanent bridges using an arrow. Lopen covertly retrieved the money during their next bridge runs and turned the money over to Kaladin. Discovery of Surgebinding powers\n\nIn one of the next runs, Bridge Four dropped to just twenty-six members when both Maps and Arik died. Kaladin struggled to deal with their deaths, worried that soon he’d be the only one left.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - The rest of Bridge Four also appeared anxious as they fell in with their bridgeleader. Returning to camp, Kaladin dismissed the men, who in turn gave him a salute that Teft taught them. Teft lingered, allowing the bridgeleader to look at his arm. Under the ruse, Teft punched Kaladin, forcing him to unconsciously use his powers to defend himself. Kaladin demanded to know what Teft was doing, who just replied that he was testing something. Before either man could discuss it further, Lopen pointed out that Kaladin was glowing. Grabbing Teft, Kaladin demanded to know what he’d done to him. Teft denied doing anything, pointing out that Kaladin had been feeding off Stormlight since he’d been sick. Seeing Syl out of the corner of his eye, Kaladin confronted the spren about his powers. Realizing they come from the Knights Radiant, Kaladin grew scared and wanted to be rid of them. Syl questioned why he’d want to be rid of something of the Windrunners. Kaladin wondered if he was cursed, which caused Syl to run away. When Lopen and Teft found him, Kaladin fled, overwhelmed at his new discovery. That night, Kaladin came across Hoid, who told him the story of Derethil and the Wandersail, a story that Kaladin interpreted as one about taking responsibility. Before Hoid left, he gave Kaladin a Trailman's flute and charged him with looking after his apprentice, Sigzil, who he now graduated to a full Worldsinger. Syl, who was present for the story, returned to Kaladin and explained she was behind what was happening to him. Syl offered to cut off their bond, but it would leave them both crippled. However, Kaladin decided to accept the responsibility that Surgebinding represented and use the power to help others. Kaladin spent the next week trying to learn how to use his Surgebinding powers with Teft’s help with little to no success while Bridge Four continued to train under Rock’s leadership. While trying to learn Surgebinding, Teft told Kaladin what he knew of the Knights Radiant, teaching him the First Ideal of the Immortal Words. Their training was interrupted when Hashal came to visit. She informed Kaladin that Bridge Four would now go on every bridge run, citing they were a “model” for the other crews. They would no longer get the normal break between runs, a further reprisal for the side carry incident, and would now do chasm duty at night. Responding to the increased danger this change brought, Kaladin came up with a plan to use the skins of dead Parshendi found in the chasms as armor. In order to bring the armor out of the chasms, Kaladin successfully managed to use his powers to run up a wall and attach the armor to the underside of the permanent bridge they originally used to hide the spheres. During one of the next bridge runs, Kaladin donned the carapace armor and ran ahead of the bridge crews, drawing the attention of the Parshendi. The desecration of a Parshendi corpse enraged the warriors who focused all of their efforts on Kaladin, ignoring everyone else on the battlefield. Drawing in Stormlight, Kaladin dodged arrows, his muscles reacting quickly. As Bridge Four came into range, an arrow cut open Kaladin’s arm, but to his surprise, it began to seal up instead of bleed. Continuing to serve as a distraction, Kaladin’s Surgebinding abilities protected him and the bridge crews from any harm, marking his plan a resounding success. While Bridge Four was resting and watching Kaladin treat a Thaylen man, a group of Parshendi soldiers attempted to ambush them. However, Dalinar Kholin came to their rescue and saluted them as he left. Given the success of the carapace armor, Matal gave Kaladin permission to outfit all of Bridge Four in the armor, with his wife Hashal claiming it was her idea the entire time. He set Leyten, an apprentice armorer, to work on making the sets of carapace armor with the help of the wounded men. Meanwhile, the spearmen’s training advanced rapidly, with Moash and Skar emerging as the most skilled. Battle of the Tower \nTen days later, on , Bridge Four participated in the Battle of the Tower, where the combined armies of Highprinces Sadeas and Dalinar assaulted the Tower. By this time, they had not only perfected using the carapace armor and large wooden shields, but they had made enough sets to outfit the entire unit."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin led the charge, staying in front of the other decoys, trying to distract the Parshendi forces as best he could. However, his efforts weren’t as successful as the first time he donned the armor. Five bridge crews dropped, slaughtered right where they ran.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - While Bridge Four fared better, they didn’t arrive unscathed. Skar and Teft both suffered injuries, which Kaladin tended to once they reached the Tower. Once Kaladin finished, he surveyed the battlefield and to his surprise, Sadeas was retreating. At first, he thought something must be wrong, but then he quickly realized that Sadeas had set up a trap, abandoning Dalinar and his men on the Tower with no means of escape. Bridge Four retreated with the rest of Sadeas’ army, lagging behind so they could carry their wounded. As Kaladin carried the bridge, he had the idea of using the battle to escape, allowing the army to think that his men had been killed. Once Matal agreed to leave them behind, Kaladin explained the details of the escape to the men and offered to stay behind with the wounded men. Bridge Four protested, but Kaladin commanded them to stick to the plan. However, there was more than just the wounded men plaguing him. Looking back to the Tower, he watched as Dalinar and his men continued fighting. The men of Bridge Four asked if there was anything they could do, but Kaladin refused, claiming it would be suicide. Syl, who had taken up the form of a full-sized person, spoke up and revealed that she remembered being an honorspren, a spirit of oaths, promises, and nobility. After a moment of internal conflict, Kaladin ordered his men to turn around and head back towards Dalinar’s army. Kaladin led Bridge Four as they charged the plateau in hopes of giving Dalinar’s army a chance to escape. He was filled with one purpose only and that was to protect.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - He ran ahead, dodging arrows, but he quickly realized something was wrong. Syl drew his attention back to Bridge Four and the many arrows pointed at their unshielded flank. He ordered them to go into the side carry position to deflect the arrows, something they hadn’t done in weeks. Reaching his crew, he turned just in time to see more archers behind them drawing for a large volley. He screamed and threw every bit of Stormlight he could into his shield, pulling over a hundred arrows into it. Seeing what Kaladin had done, both groups of Parshendi that had released volleys turned and fled. Knowing that Kaladin was in no condition to run the bridge, Moash led the rest of the men onwards to help Dalinar. Kaladin crawled to the edge of the chasm and asked Syl if she could help make him stronger, but she shook her head. As he listened to the sounds of war and death around him, he was transported back to the most horrible of days, the day Tien died. When he snapped out of his trance, Syl asked him if he knew the Words. Wanting to save his men, Kaladin took up a spear and spoke the Second Ideal of the Windrunners, progressing his path to becoming a member of the Knights Radiant. Kaladin fought with amazing prowess, his natural talents enhanced to unnatural levels by Stormlight. He single-handedly engaged and defeated dozens of Parshendi. Kaladin and his men held the bridge until Dalinar’s soldiers were able to fight their way to them. During the brief respite, the bridgeleader checked on his men, learning they had suffered three casualties and several injuries. Kaladin organized the retreat, putting Teft in charge of the bridgemen and keeping Moash by his side. Upon closer inspection of the Alethi soldiers, Kaladin realized that neither Highprince Dalinar nor Adolin were with them. Heading back to the front lines, Kaladin found the Cobalt Guard, the group sworn to protect Adolin, still fighting. Knowing they wouldn’t leave without their highprince, Kaladin searched for Adolin and ordered him to retreat. However, Adolin refused to leave without his father. Kaladin convinced him to go with Moash while he went to retrieve Dalinar. He leapt over the chasm to where Dalinar was fighting with Eshonai, both of whom were utilizing a full set of Shards. Fighting a Shardbearer for a second time, Kaladin rescued Dalinar and retreated with what remained of his army. Dalinar commended Kaladin for his actions and promised that he would ensure their safety from Sadeas. A Promise Kept\nWhen they arrived back at the warcamps, Kaladin and the rest of Bridge Four accompanied Dalinar to confront Sadeas. Dalinar offered to pay an exorbitant sum of money, sixty emerald broams each, for the freedom of each bridgemen, but Sadeas refused. Finally, Dalinar offered his Shardblade Oathbringer in exchange for the men, which proved to be an offer Sadeas couldn’t refuse. With the deal made, Dalinar walked up to a shocked Kaladin and instructed him to gather the men he left behind and go to his warcamp. Later that night, Dalinar offered to make the bridgemen soldiers in his army, with Bridge Four becoming his personal guard. Kaladin accepted an appointment to the rank of captain, agreeing after Dalinar promised him an extraordinary amount of authority and autonomy for a darkeyes. Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174) \n\n Rebuilding the Army \nAfter the massive casualties at the Battle of the Tower, Kaladin was tasked with turning the remaining bridgemen into a standing army. He promoted Teft, Moash, Skar, Rock and Sigzil to lieutenants, a rank between captain and sergeant, to form a command structure for a thousand men. More specifically, Kaladin named Rock quartermaster, with Lopen as his second, and appointed Sigzil to be their clerk as he was the only one who could read glyphs. He put Teft in charge of training, suggesting that he combine the remaining bridgemen into twenty crews and train two members in each to go back and train the others. Kaladin promised a few men to assist Teft, but explained that would have to do as most of Bridge Four, including Moash and Skar, would be needed to keep Dalinar alive. Without the highprince, Kaladin feared that the bridgemen would just be sold back to Torol Sadeas by his successor. With word spreading that the emperor of Azir was dead at the hands of the Assassin in White, Kaladin reminded Teft that the assassin had already killed Gavilar and they just had to hope he was done. Regardless, they had to protect Dalinar at all costs. Freedom, Bridge Four \nOnce in agreement, they rounded up the rest of the men in Bridge Four and went to get their slave brands covered with tattoos. Hobber sat down first, with each man following, receiving tattoos that said “Freedom, Bridge Four.” Sitting down last, Kaladin closed his eyes and waited for the tattooist to finish. She cursed, revealing that the tattoo ink wouldn’t take. Kaladin sighed, realizing he was unconsciously holding Stormlight in his veins. He banished the Stormlight and she tried again, the ink taking this time. He looked in the mirror, seeing his slave brands covered up for a moment. Syl landed on his shoulder and he unconsciously sucked in Stormlight which melted the tattoo. The tattooist cursed again and picked up her rag, preparing to try again."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - However, Kaladin insisted that it was fine and tossed a small bag of spheres to the tattooist. Upon Bridge Four’s return to the barracks, Rind was waiting for them with their new Cobalt Guard uniforms. While the men eagerly tried on their uniforms, Teft hesitated, unsure if he deserved to wear something like this again. Kaladin objected, saying the uniform was what he was and not to let the slave rule him. Teft countered, asking Kaladin when he was going to admit he was doing the same thing. Teft tried to convince him that he needed to show Dalinar that he was a Surgebinder and a lighteyes. However, Kaladin confessed that he had everything taken away from him by the lighteyes and for now, he couldn’t let them take this too. Dropping the subject, Teft put on his uniform and joined the others. With the uniforms sorted out, the men cut off the insignia of the Cobalt Guard, declaring themselves Bridge Four. Becoming What Dalinar Needs \nKaladin set up rotations to protect Dalinar, always assigning himself, Moash, or Skar for the Blackthorn. After a small council, Dalinar wished for Kaladin and his best men to take on more duties extending to protecting Navani, his sons and eventually King Elhokar himself. Dalinar confessed that there may have already been an attempt on the king’s life when the gemstones on his Shardplate seemed to be sabotaged. Unsure of who to trust, Dalinar asked Kaladin to familiarize himself with how the King’s Guard works and to learn from them. Once their training was complete, Kaladin would be in charge of a new group guarding the king consisting of some of the old King’s Guard and Kaladin’s own men. Kaladin worried that his men were stretched thin, but Dalinar said he was not alone in that problem. During a trip to the chasms, Kaladin asked Syl what she thought about Dalinar’s plan to reform the Knights Radiant. She exclaimed that not only was it a wonderful idea, but she was jealous that he thought of it first. He then asked her if a spren could be writing the glyphs on the wall. While she didn’t know, Syl admitted that she had seen a spren like red lightning, a dangerous spren. Kaladin asked Syl if there were more like him. Though she expected the question, she didn’t answer him at first. She eventually told him that there were others like him as spren, those she didn’t know, tried to reclaim what was lost. Syl goes on to say that Kaladin has to become what Dalinar is looking for and not to make him search in vain. While in the chasms, Sigzil conducted some baseline tests of Kaladin’s Surgebinding abilities with Rock and Lopen’s assistance. They had to rely on counting as Sigzil didn’t have a proper clock to time Kaladin, nor did he even know how to measure Stormlight. Kaladin suggested that they use chips since they were weighed before being encased in glass. However, Sigzil worried that he was wasting Kaladin’s time as there was still so much about Stormlight that they didn’t know. Lopen reassured him that it wasn’t a waste and asked if Kaladin could stick him to the wall. Able to do so, Rock commented that this skill could be very useful in battle. They continued to experiment further with his new abilities, the others taking up spears to test him. Just like with his spear, Kaladin knew these new abilities would take lots of practice. This meant Kaladin would have to find a new person like himself to spar with. Calling it a day, the men returned to the warcamp and to the news that a hero had come to the Shattered Plains. Kaladin’s heart became ice when he heard the hero was none other than Highlord Amaram, the man who stole Kaladin’s Shardblade and branded him a slave. Preparing for the Assassin in White \nKaladin led a patrol through the Lighteyes' training grounds with Moash and Drehy, to guard Adolin and Renarin. Syl encouraged Kaladin to tell Dalinar about Amaram, but he refused, thinking he wouldn't be believed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin talked with Zahel, an ex-soldier ardent, but was left alone soon after. Kaladin asked Syl if she found Zahel weird, and she replied saying all humans other than Rock seemed weird. Later, Kaladin watched Zahel train Renarin. Zahel was having Renarin jump off the roof of the grounds to practice being comfortable with Shardplate's strength. Kaladin mocked Renarin's clumsiness, but Zahel countered, saying Renarin had a good attitude about it. Zahel offered Kaladin the chance to train under him, but Kaladin declined. Kaladin participated in a mock duel with Zahel, who used a blunted Shardblade. Kaladin lost, but Zahel believed Kaladin could have given someone enough time to escape in a real fight. Adolin, who had been practicing further away, insulted Kaladin, which angered him. Kaladin charged at Adolin in a fit of rage, but was quickly defeated, as Adolin was wearing Shardplate. Zahel berated the prince for his carelessness. Kaladin used Stormlight to heal himself, and ran at Adolin again, only to lose his strength and collapse. Zahel commended Kaladin for his quick thinking, but claimed it would not be enough against a Shardbearer. Kaladin asked Syl why his energy suddenly dissapeared, and she responded, saying he was not protecting anyone while attacking Adolin. During each highstorm, Kaladin gathered all those who were under his protection in one location to make it easier to keep them safe. However, he blamed himself when the countdown to the Everstorm continued to appear. After a particular highstorm, King Elhokar was nearly killed after the railing of the balcony he was standing on broke free. Kaladin and Dalinar concluded that the support was cut with a Shardblade and that it was an assassination attempt. Later, Kaladin approached Dalinar and told him about Amaram's betrayal and Kaladin's branding. Dalinar was doubtful, believing Amaram to be an honorable man, but agreed to look into it. This angered Kaladin, leaving him unsatisfied with Dalinar’s promise. Kaladin figured he'd take matters into his own hands, but Syl countered, saying Kaladin was not a Skybreaker and was worrying her. Soon after, Dalinar requested that Kaladin and his men learn how to ride horses, as they might be useful in the future. The groom thought it was absurd for darkeyes to learn horseback riding, but she taught them anyways. Kaladin was hesitant to learn at first, but he did so anyway, at the wishes of Dalinar. At first, he rode an old, mellow horse named Spray, until Adolin rode by and taunted him for not riding a fast horse. He jokingly told Kaladin he should ride Dreamstorm, a wild and violent horse. Kaladin decided to do so, and mounted the horse. As it bucked him wildly, he was forced to lash himself to the saddle using Adhesion, lest he get flung off. He was whipped around, until he finally ran out of Stormlight, flinging him several feet in the air and landing across the stable."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - The attempt impressed Adolin, so he apologized for taunting him. Kaladin talked with Natam about the assassination attempt, and who was on the balcony. Natam told Kaladin that the only person on the balcony after the storm was Moash, before riding away. The next highstorm, Kaladin had a dream in which the Stormfather visited him. The Stormfather said that Kaladin would soon betray Syl, thereby killing her. When he woke up, Syl told him that something was wrong, and that The One Who Hates was coming. Kaladin, trusting Syl\'s word, entered Dalinar\'s room and warned the of the impending danger. Dalinar trusted Kaladin\'s instincts, so he retrieved the king and they all fled from the palace. Hobber and Beld scouted ahead, while Moash and Elinor stayed by Elhokar. As they ran, they came to a dark hallway with the spheres drained and a large cut in the wall. Szeth appeared from the darkness shortly after. Kaladin, Dalinar, and Adolin fought Szeth, while Renarin and other Bridge Four members escorted the king out of the palace. Eventually, Adolin was defeated and Kaladin\'s arm was severed by Szeth\'s Honorblade. This left Dalinar to fend for himself. As Dalinar fought Szeth, Kaladin arrived and pushed both him and Szeth through the hole in wall, and they tumbled to the ground. As they fell to the ground, Kaladin consumed Stormlight from Szeth\'s reserves, which allowed him to heal himself from the fall. Szeth was shocked at Kaladin\'s survival, and denied the return of the Knights Radiant. He fled after he saw Kaladin heal his arm, and Kaladin collapes from exhaustion. Kaladin soon woke up and reentered the palace, searching for any dead or injured. He found Dalinar and the others resting and tending to any wounded. Dalinar expressed his surprise at Kaladin\'s survival, and Kaladin lied, saying he lived due to Szeth\'s abilities. Kaladin left to search for his men, and found Beld\'s dead body, along with Hobber, who had lost his legs from Szeth\'s blade. Upon seeing he could barely defend against a Shardbearer, Kaladin visited Zahel and asked if he could train under him. Training Continues\nKaladin continued to lead training of the bridge crews, and assigned Teft to train Bridge Seventeen in the chasms. Kaladin wanted to defeat Szeth, now that the bridgemen were mostly safe. While he surveyed training, Kaladin met with Sigzil, Rock, and Lopen, to further discuss Kaladin\'s abilities. After many attempts, Kaladin fianlly Lashed himself to the chasm wall. Kaladin experimented a little, before he and the others returned to the barracks. They were met with a tense dinner gathering. Renarin Kholin had come to the fire, and asked Kaladin if he could join Bridge Four. Kaladin allowed him to join, albeit with discomfort at letting a lighteyes join their ranks. Moash, Teft, and a few other bridgmen requested Kaladin go out with them to get drinks, but Kaladin declined the offer, and got some stew. After accepting Zahel\'s offer to train, Kaladin, Teft, Moash, and Yake visited the training grounds. Zahel had them each practice with one of the King\'s blades to get comfortable with the sight at one. They also practiced basic sword stances, which would allow them to better attack and defend against a Shardbearer. While taking a break, Kaladin noticed Shallan enter, who had come to update the Shardblade and Plate record. He walked with Adolin towards her, and they shared some banter. Kaladin returned to the water barrel, and Moash arrived shortly after. They discussed the reason for Moash\'s hatred towards the King, and Kaladin agreed to meet with the Moash\'s partners. He talked with Syl about what was right, and mentioned Dalinar\'s maneuver when fighting Szeth to Zahel, a lastclap, before training some more with the other men. Kaladin surveyed some of the bridge crews one night, before Syl convinced him to relax a litle and get some stew. He made his way back to Bridge Four\'s barracks, and was met with two Herdazians: Lopen\'s "cousins." Kaladin found Shen stacking bags of grain in the storage room, and Kaladin apologized for being hesitant to arm Shen. He handed a spear to Shen, before being called out by Moash. Upon Moash\'s prompting, Kaladin agreed to get drinks with some of the bridgemen. When they arrived, Peet got them a table and Rock told the story of his people. Eventually, Moash took Kaladin aside, and they met with Graves and some others, including Danlan, a women Adolin had previously courted. Graves asked Kaladin to consider assisting them on their mission to assassinate Elhokar, and Kaladin hesitantly agreed, to Syl\'s dismay. As they left the room, Kaladin forbid Moash from talking or meeting with Graves and the others again. One night, Kaladin strolled along the Shattered Plains, looking for the place at which he met Wit, months before. Upon reaching the desired location, Kaladin stepped off the edge, plummeting into the chasm. After sucking in Stormlight to assist with the landing, he took off in a jog and practiced Lashing himself to the walls of the chasm. After some time, he was able to do so without stumbling, and was soon able to repeatadly Lash himself quicker and more accurately. He threw caution aside and Lashed himself upward, towards the sky, and experienced true freedom and triumph for the first time after Tien\'s death. Soon, he was hurtling past chasms and plataues at incredible speeds. Kaladin Lashed himself higher and higher, before reluctantly returning to the ground, fearing he would run out of Stormlight. He conversed with Syl for a moment, before he retured to the warcamps. But rather than returning to Dalinar\'s camp, he traveled to Sadeas\', realizing he could kill Amaram right then and there. Syl pleaded for him not to and reminded Kaladin of the experience he just had.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Intent on not tainting the memory, Kaladin returned to  Dalinar's camp. Upon returning, he encountered Shen, who said he needed to leave, and gave Kaladin his real name: Rlain. He then departed. Adolin was guarded under Kaladin on the day he was supposed to meet with Shallan. As the pair made their way to the carriage, Kaladin realized the driver was none other than Wit. As the carriage moved along, Kaladin spoke with Wit, who revealed he knew about Kaladin's abilities. When they arrived at Sebarial's camp, Shallan hugged Wit, to everyone's surprise. Kaladin accompanied the couple to a menagerie in the Outer Market. On the way there, he rode in the carriage with Adolin and Shallan, as he was suspicious of her. Upon their arrival at the menagerie, Kaladin realized Wit was gone, replaced with one of Adolin's servants. Kaladin talked with Syl and walked with Adolin and Shallan as they observed the animals. Soon, Dalinar arrived, accompanied by Amaram, who was wearing a strange cloak. Dalinar then announced that the Knights Radiant had been reestablished, with Amaram at their head. Adolin's Duel\n\nDuring Adolin's duel against Relis Ruthar, Elit Ruthar, Abrobadar, and Jakamav, Kaladin guarded Dalinar and Elhokar while they watched the duel. After seeing Renarin enter the arena and quickly fall to the ground, Kaladin proclaimed honor dead, and asked Dalinar to take care of his men if things went poorly, before jumping into the arena to help Adolin. As he entered the arena, Syl promised this would be different than when Kaladin defended Amaram. Relis ignored Kaladin at first, but quickly realized his opponents' skill. Kaladin regrouped with Adolin and told him to focus on breaking their opponents Shardplate. Adolin requested Kaladin watch out for Renarin, who was very vulnerable. Kaladin drew Relis' attention while Adolin fought Elit and Jakamav. Relis dueled Kaladin for a short time, but then returned to fight Adolin. Kaladin used a lashing-enhanced kick to knock Relis down, breaking his own legs in process, though he was able to heal them using Stormlight. Kaladin noticed that he cracked some of Relis' shards with his kick. Adolin's own armor was mostly cracked, though he managed to land a strong blow on Elit's chest plate, cracking it and slowing Elit greatly, giving Kaladin the chance to force Elit to yield. The remaining three opponents gathered to battle Adolin, while Renarin sat alone in the sand. Kaladin demanded Elit give him his helm, who complied, and used it as a armored gauntlet, then continued to help Adolin. Relis and Jakamav both tried to attack Kaladin, but he was able to dodge their Shardblades or block them with the helm, until he ran out of Stormlight. At this point, Kaladin realized that he had been feeding it to the Plate in order to keep it from shattering. Kaladin eventually was backed against a wall, until Adolin appeared and grappled Jakamav to the ground. Kaladin noticed that Abrobadar had been defeated by Adolin as well. Relis, the last man standing, rushed toward Renarin, who was vulnerable. Kaladin followed, and yelled for Renarin to yield, however Renarin only dismissed his Blade, and did nothing more. Relis raised his Blade toward Renarin, but ended up swinging it at Kaladin, who then caught it in a lastclap. Relis heard the scream that came from Kaladin holding a Shardblade, and ran from the arena, forfeiting the duel. Jakamav demanded for Adolin to fight him as he was held down. Rather than actually fighting, Kaladin placed his knife in a crack in Jakamav's plate, and told him to yield. Jakamav yielded and Adolin was declared the victor. Adolin laughed joyously at the spoils he won and asked Kaladin to help him remove his drained armor. Elhokar announced how impressed he was by the duel, and offered Adolin a boon. Kaladin noticed Sadeas trying to leave the arena, but before Sadeas could slip away, Adolin demanded the right to duel Sadeas, right then and there. Kaladin, who realized this was his chance to duel Amaram, also demanded the right to challenge him, for his crimes of murder and obstruction of justice, which caused Amaram to cower. Next to Kaladin, Adolin groaned, and the crowd silenced. Elhokar ordered Kaladin to be arrested. After the duel, Dalinar, Elhokar, and Kaladin conversed in Dalinar's rooms. Kaladin sat chained to a seat, while Dalinar and Elhokar argued. Elhokar argued for Kaladin getting punished, Dalinar against. Eventually, they reached a compromise: imprisonment. Elhokar left, and Dalinar berated Kaladin for his actions. Soldiers soon came to take Kaladin, all of them respectful. As he shuffled through the camp, the eyes of soldiers and scribes fell upon him. When Kaladin reached his cell, he promised to never trust a lighteyes ever again. In Prison \nKaladin's prison cell was nicer than most, but he still hated it. He talked with Syl about Dalinar, and said he was just like all the other lighteyes, though he quickly took it back."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - He tried to consume Stormlight from a nearby gem, but failed. Soon, Wit entered unannounced, and sat on a bench. He carried a stringed instrument, which he was tuning. Despite Kaladin\'s reluctance, Wit began his story, one of a man named Fleet. In the story, Fleet raced against a highstorm across Roshar. In the end, Fleet reached Shinovar but collapsed and died from exhaustion, leaving his spirit to live in the storms. As Wit told the story, Kaladin interjected between lines, prompting Wit to continue. Kaladin was able to clearly see Fleet and the story being told in his head while his eyes were closed. As the tale came to a close, Wit and Kaladin discussed the origin of stories, before Wit left. Life dragged on in Kaladin\'s cell, though his accommodations were nice. When Dalinar entered the room, Kaladin jumped to attention and saluted him. They spoke about Elhokar and Dalinar\'s attempts to free Kaladin. Dalinar revealed what he knew about Roshone and how he ended up in Hearthstone, much to Kaladin\'s surprise. Dalinar encouraged Kaladin to act better, lest he ruin the reputation Kaladin had built for darkeyes. Upon Dalinar\'s departure, Kaladin contemplated what he would do, eventually coming to the decision that Elhokar had to die. As Kaladin\'s release seemed to seem further and further away, the gloom drew closer. Kaladin was able to reach the nearby gem and suck in some Stormlight, albeit a very small amount. Syl worried about Kaladin and started to grow distant. Finally, Kaladin was released. As he left his cell,  Kaladin realized Adolin had locked himself up, in protest of Kaladin\'s imprisonment. When Kaladin and Adolin exited the room, Bridge Four was there to greet them, saluting and cheering. Adolin offered a full set of Shards to Kaladin, though he declined, and instead gave them to Moash. As Moash eagerly put on the armor, Rock demanded they all celebrate with a feast, and Bridge Four retreated to their barracks. Kaladin helped put the rest of Moash\'s armor on and agreed to help "accomplish their task." Moash ran to the sparring grounds to practice with Shardplate, and Kaladin rejoined Bridge Four. In the Chasms \nKaladin joined Dalinar, Adolin, and Shallan on a scouting expedition across the Shattered Plains. As they crossed the plateaus, Kaladin noticed Syl\'s absence, and his inability to consume Stormlight. Dalinar talked with Kaladin regarding Renarin\'s inclusion in Bridge Four and how it was affecting him. Then, Kaladin talked to Adolin about a potential attack from Szeth, and how they would defend against him. Eventually, they reached the final scouting plateau, one that has a dead chasmfiend on top. As Adolin, Shallan and Dalinar stood on the mechanical bridge, Kaladin realized a bit too late about the incoming danger. He ran towards the bridge and so did Adolin upon seeing his distress. While the prince was able to reach Dalinar and save him, a carpenter from Sadeas\' camp pulled an emergency lever, which caused the bridge to collapse and sent Kaladin and Shallan to plummet into the chasms. As they fall, Kaladin managed to suck in a small amount of Stormlight, saving his life. Shallan did the same, though neither recongnized the other as Radiant. They wandered the chasms for a while, and begin to argue. Soon, they heard a large scraping noise: a chasmfiend. Shallan began to lure the chasmfiend toward them, so she could get a sketch of a live one, much to Kaladin\'s dismay. Eventually, they left and continued back towards the warcamps. They bantered for a bit, Kaladin assuming Shallan\'s life was easy and pampered. Shallan responded saying that her father was abusive, and that her life was far from easy. Syl had failed to reappear and had not responded to Kaladin\'s pleas. Soon, they heard a chasmfiend again, and they hid in a small fissure to escape it. The chasmfiend swiped at them, but was unable to hit them. Kaladin planned to fight it, but Shallan, desperate for a way to escape, gave him her Shardblade to fight with. Kaladin jumped out of the fissure and they both distracted the chasmfiend, Shallan with Lightweavings and Kaladin with a Shardblade. The chasmfiend managed to bite Kaladin in the leg, severely weakening him, though as it came for another attack, Kaladin stabbed it in the roof of it\'s mouth with the Shardblade, finally killing it. As the highstorm approached, the pair grew gloomy at their imminent death. Kaladin realized they could use Shallan\'s Blade to cut a cubby out of the chasm wall, which would provide them protection from the storm. Shallan climbed upon the chasmfiend\'s back and started cutting handholds upward towards the water line. Finally, she finished, and started helping Kaladin climb up, as his leg was weakened.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin barely reached the cubby as the stormwall hit. Kaladin received a vision from the Stormfather, in which he was told he had betrayed Syl, killing her. When the storm ended, the pair found their way back to the warcamps, with Bridge Four there to meet them. Dalinar soon came, and Kaladin saluted him, despite his leg. Dalinar tells everyone to meet the needs of Kaladin, as he was a hero for bringing back Shallan. The Third Ideal (1174) \n Saving Elhokar \n\nAfter his return from the chasms, Kaladin stayed at the warcamps to heal, as Syl had disappeared. He went to the starting plateau to see Bridge Four off on the expedition to the center of the Shattered Plains.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Dalinar noticed Kaladin, and asked Amaram, who was nearby, to come speak with him. Dalinar confronts Amaram about the rumors about him. Amaram confessed as Dalinar placed his Shardblade at Amaram\'s throat. Dalinar told him to take off his Radiant cloak, and lets him go, despite Kaladin\'s protest. Kaladin thanked Dalinar, and left to go rest. With the Weeping underway, Kaladin felt the darkness return. Moash visited him and went over the plan to assassinate Elhokar. Kaladin walked through the empty camp, and tried to put his losses behind him. When he returned to his barracks, he found Elhokar there, and they conversed about Elhokar\'s confidence as king. Elhokar mentioned that Kaladin felt special, and that the shadows that haunted him vanished when he was near. He apologized for imprisoning Kaladin, then left. Later, Kaladin walked throught the lighteyes\' sparring grounds, and talked to Zahel. He asked about Wit, and tried practicing with a spear; even though his leg was weakened. Kaladin then came to the realization that Elhokar is Dalinar\'s Tien, before quickly making his way to the palace. When Kaladin returned to the palace, he found no guards, worrying him further. When he entered the king\'s room, he found Elhokar lying on a couch, unmoving. Kaladin realized quickly after that the king was drunk, not incapacitated. He said that assassins were coming and that they needed to leave. As they do, one of Graves\' men appeared and stabbed Elhokar in the side, before Kaladin stabbed the man with his spear. As they fled, Moash and Graves appeared, both in Shardplate. Kaladin argued with Moash about what was right, and Moash readied himself to fight. Moash attacked Kaladin, and Kaladin fell to the ground. Graves and Moash attempted to make it look like Szeth attacked, and Kaladin heard an argument between Syl and the Stormfather. Kaladin stood, though with great difficulty, and placed himself in front of Elhokar. He then said the third ideal of the Windrunners, at Syl\'s direction. Syl finally returned to Kaladin, in the form of a Shardblade. He sucked in Stormlight and healed himself, exploding with power, which caused Graves and Moash to flee. However, before fully retreating, Graves ranted over the fact that he had focused on making certain Kaladin was separated from Dalinar. Syl then warned Kaladin that something was very wrong. Fighting Szeth \n\nWhile Dalinar and the others were fighting the Parshendi, Kaladin plummeted towards the Shattered Plains, rejuvenated with power. Szeth, who had come to kill Dalinar, reacted in horror at Kaladin\'s arrival. Bridge Four tossed infused gems to Kaladin, prompting him to attack Szeth, seeking revenge for the fallen bridgemen. As Kaladin and Szeth clashed in the skies, the two storms raged below. Kaladin wondered why a highstorm had come, and Syl answered, saying the Parshendi had summoned it. Syl became a spear to help Kaladin better parry Szeth\'s blows, who was denying the return of the Radiants. Kaladin fought Szeth expertly, using different forms of Syl to defend and attack. Because of the hightstorm below, Kaladin\'s gemstones were renewed with Stormlight. After fighting for some time, Szeth returned to the ground to kill Dalinar, and Kaladin followed. Upon landing, the pair found an empty plateau, with no signs of activity. Szeth realized that the armies had used the Oathgate and traveled to Urithiru, and flew off to the west, with Kaladin in pursuit. Kaladin managed to stab Szeth in the foot, and then hit Szeth in the shoulder. Szeth finally acknowledged the truth, realizing he was never Truthless. Szeth stopped, and Kaladin went for a killing blow, but sliced Szeth\'s wrist instead, causing him to drop his Honorblade. Without the Blade, Szeth plummeted into the storms and chasms below. Kaladin grabbed the Blade out of the sky, and gave Syl and compliment. Kaladin returned to the ground, and found some of Bridge Four there, before using the Oathgate to transport them to Urithiru. Kaladin met with Dalinar, Renarin, and Shallan, with Renarin revealing that he was a Truthwatcher and Dalinar revealing he was a Bondsmith and had bonded with the Stormfather. Kaladin decided he would return to Hearthstone, to reunite with his parents and save them from Roshone. Return to Alethkar (1174) \n Returning to Hearthstone \n\nKaladin traveled to Hearthstone to warn his parents about the approaching Everstorm, doing what he could to prepare other villages and towns as he went. However, he was too late as the Everstorm had already struck. Walking through the destruction, Kaladin was surprised to find light emanating from the manor house. Entering the house, Kaladin was stopped by one of Roshone\'s soldiers. The guard led Kaladin through the manor where the sounds of wounded led Kaladin to a makeshift triage room. There, he found his father, Lirin, and his mother, Hesina, attending to the wounded. After an emotional reunion, the soldiers insisted that Kaladin be taken to Roshone. Lirin offers to buy his writ of slavery, insisting that they will not take his son, lest they have to find themselves another surgeon. Kaladin observes the wounded, determining they were not signs of battle, but rather of natural disaster. The soldiers sent for Roshone who was surprised to see Kaladin alive and insistent on seeing his brands. Before the conversation went much further, Kaladin punched Roshone for his friend Moash. Kaladin apologizes for his actions and promises not to hit the brightlord again, but rather that they need to talk. Roshone refused at first and insisted that his soldiers attack Kaladin, but they refuse after Kaladin summons Syl. The brightlord tells Kaladin that the parshmen escaped, but they fled instead of attacking the city. Kaladin asks what direction they went, but Roshone\'s soldiers do not know. Kaladin promises to tell Elhokar about the city\'s destroyed food supply. In return, he requests a horse to go hunt the parshmen and tells Roshone that he can\'t stay. He warns the brightlord that he must stand up and lead his people. Laral promises they will do it and arranges for Kaladin to use a spanreed. Kaladin questions whether or not she is truly happy and he is surprised to find she is content with her life in Hearthstone. Kaladin dropped the argument and returned to see his father. Lirin is happy that he returned and is well, but is concerned that he is caught up in war. Kaladin tells him that he is a "watcher at the rim" and must do what he can to protect others. His father understands and asks him to see his mother before he leaves. On his way, he runs into Laral who has the spanreed set up for Kaladin. He gives an update to Dalinar, who encourages him to find out what the enemy is doing without taking any unnecessary risks. After their conversation, Kaladin goes to see Hesina who introduces him to his new brother, Oroden. Before leaving, Kaladin promises he will come back for Lirin, Hesina, and Oroden, but Lirin insists that he must stay if the Desolation is upon them. He assures them he will return and that Dalinar has refounded the Knights Radiant and this time, they will not fail them. Finding the Parshmen () \n Hornhollow \nUpon his departure from Hearthstone, Kaladin pursued the Voidbringers. After two days, he arrived in the village of Hornhollow.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - There, the townspeople had gathered for a town meeting. Syl transformed herself into the shape of a Shardblade and he was welcomed by the crowd. A lighteyed man asked Kaladin if he'd rather rest and eat or attack the rogue parshmen."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin ordered the man to take him to them. An ardent informs him that the parshmen, about fifty in number and presumably in warform, sought the grain out specifically. Two men were hurt during the attack, Khem and another man. Kaladin then seeks out the citylord who tells him that his scouts know which direction the parshmen went, towards Kholinar. The citylord offers to have his men escort Kaladin, but he departs alone, saying they would only slow him down. Traveling with the Parshmen \nWhen Kaladin finally caught up to the Voidbringers, he was surprised to find they not only were playing cards, but that they looked very different than what he expected. Rather than being red and black marbled like Rlain, the parshmen\'s skin was marbled white and red. They were not wearing warform, nor did they have red eyes. Kaladin observed them for awhile and tells Syl they had been wrong. These parshmen weren\'t the destroyers they had been told about. One of their number noticed him, sounding the alarm. As they took up their cudgels, Kaladin hesitated. Though he knew he could easily defeat them, it didn\'t sit right, so he surrendered instead. The parshmen bound Kaladin to a tree while they debated what to do with him. Against Khen\'s wishes, they didn\'t kill him, but yet pulled him by a rope as they traveled. Kaladin talked up Sah, his captor, explaining card game strategies to him. As they walked, Kaladin realized that the parshmen weren\'t monsters, they were just slaves, like him. Sah argued that Kaladin couldn\'t possibly understand what they had been through, but Kaladin felt he did understand a little. Continuing on, Syl panicked, worried that the parshmen could see her or at least the spren could. Syl explained that the spren leading the parshmen must be from him, a Voidspren. Syl stayed close to Kaladin, just in case he needed to summon her. Kaladin eventually spoke up, complimenting the parshmen and offering them assistance in their travels. Sah refuses and they continue their pace until they stop for a break. Sah\'s little girl, Vai, brings Kaladin some water and she asks him why his people won\'t leave them alone. He struggles to figure out how to explain the war and her ancestors to a seven-year-old. She retreats as the parshmen make camp and Kaladin asks Syl to help cut his rope. Rather than summoning her as a Blade, he dropped a rock alerting the parshmen to his freedom. He asked for his knife so he can build a fire and after a short conference, they allowed him to do just that. Over the next few days, Kaladin spent his time showing the parshmen how to cook food, bind wounds, and build equipment. Sah becomes frustrated though that he needs Kaladin\'s help at all, that he fled one master just to have to listen to him explain things that he should already know. Kaladin explained that "freedom" is a strange word and that despite serving another brightlord, he feels more free now than ever. Once Sah finished the hatchet, he asked Kaladin why he isn\'t afraid to show them these things. Kaladin explained that he has a choice and that it doesn\'t have to come to war. Despite his own words, Kaladin fears that the war is inevitable, so Syl encourages him to find the middle ground. Revolar \nKaladin secured a private storm bunker for the growing group of parshmen in the Vamah city of Revolar after Syl warned him of an approaching highstorm. Khen was pleased with Kaladin\'s work and the group hunkered down for the storm. While it raged outside and Kaladin debated how much longer he could delay returning to Urithiru, the yellow Voidspren appeared beside him. Kaladin told her he could see her and she replied that she wanted him to. She asked Kaladin why he was still there and after a lie, he admitted that the world is changing and he wanted to see which way it went. She asked Kaladin if he would fight for them and he questioned if he would be allowed. She admitted that the final decision isn\'t with her, as she is just a messenger, but that he will find out once they reach their destination. She finally asked Kaladin how he knew of the approaching highstorm. He said he felt it in his bones and she said humans can\'t feel storms.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - She gave him a knowing smile and then disappeared. While in Revolar, the number of parshmen camping around the city continued to grow exponentially reaching at least 40,000-50,000 in number. Sah told Kaladin that the number was amazing, that he always imagined the parshmen having their own city and now they do. As they walked through the city, Kaladin saw not only signs of the Everstorm, but also of looting. He asked Sah is this what he wanted, to conquer a kingdom and destroy humankind. Sah confessed that he didn't know, but that he couldn't be a slave again. Kaladin countered that they are his people and that a war to exterminate one side or the other can't be the answer. Sah offered that maybe it doesn't have to be that way, but that he could fight alongside them in something bigger, oppressed against the oppressors. Once he passed where Syl was, she told him that there are a lot of yellow spren around and another highstorm is coming. As Khen's group approached the Parshendi leaders of the small town, the scribe evaluated them and asked about Kaladin's presence. Yixli spoke highly of him, but the scribe said that the Fused would have to label him free. He stepped out of line and saw a tall parshwoman with red eyes, like those of the Shattered Plains. Seeing the Fused, Kaladin knew it was time to go. He sucked in the Stormlight from Khen's pouch and took the pouch from her. He thanked Khen for her kindness, warned her of the impending storm, and said that no matter what she is told, he didn't wish to be her enemy."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - He launched himself into the air as the Fused began to scream. Once in the air, Kaladin looked over the scores of parshmen and he told Syl he can't help but feel a kinship to them. She argued that they're Voidbringers and they conquered the city, but Kaladin explained that they are people who are angry and have good reason to be. He reminds her of how he felt about Elhokar, but she countered that he changed his mind. They continue to argue and Kaladin confessed that he just wanted an absolute right on this, not a moral code with exceptions. Kaladin looked down at the city once more and they both realized the parshmen guarding the humans had not done any preparations for the impending storm. Kaladin Lashed himself down to them and shouted warning of the highstorm. They just stared at him, so Kaladin summoned his Blade and warned the people to take refuge wherever they did during the last storms. He charged the parshmen guards to do better and that if they wanted to claim moral superiority over the humans, they have to treat them better than they were treated. During the exchange with the guards, something crashed into Kaladin, tossing him backwards. As they grasped for his throat, Kaladin kicked them off and he Lashed himself into the air. The red-eyed parshman that attacked Kaladin glowed with what looked like dark Stormlight. Another creature appeared and Kaladin Lashed himself straight toward the stormwall. He pleaded with the Stormfather to show mercy and spare the people below. The Stormfather seemed to consider his request, but said it was something that could not be done. Kaladin zoomed to the ground hoping to find the people safe, but it was all for naught. He hit the ground and dropped Syl, seizing a young father, his son, and another woman. He led them to a group of two dozen people and walked with them. Consumed with pain, Kaladin sucked in Stormlight and deflected the storm while the battered people huddled behind him. He provided them with cover, diverting the storm long enough for the people to reach the bunker. Syl was impressed with what he had done, but Kaladin was dissatisfied that it wasn't enough. Kaladin pushed himself out of the stormwall and then rode in front of the storm for a good hour. Syl instructed Kaladin to follow the wind's nudging as the Stormfather's way of apologizing. He allowed the winds to channel him for hours and by the time the storm passed, he found himself outside of Urithiru. Siege of Kholinar (1174) \n Training and Recruiting Bridge Four Squires \nThe morning after his return, Sigzil came to Kaladin with a list of tasks and decisions for Kaladin to make. He had a lot of details of running an army to tend to."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Together they went to the quartermaster's office to check out the royal emerald reserve, to be used for training. Later, Bridge Four went to train and hold try-outs on the Shattered Plains, with Rock providing food & drinks. King Elhokar came by to watch the training to ask Kaladin to join the Kholinar mission. Kaladin helped Hobber breath in Stormlight for the first time and Hobber start healing his legs. The group spotted smoke in the distance, they found a caravan that was attacked by Voidbringers. Among the caravan was Rock's family, who are introduced to Bridge Four. Kaladin attended a conference of the Radiants and leaders. He argued with Jasnah about the motives of the Voidbringers, arguing that the common Parshsmen just want a place to live."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - He also vehemently disagreed with Jasnah's suggestion to find and kill the Heralds. Later Bridge Four continued training, with almost all of Bridge Four now being able to draw in Stormlight. Kaladin was worried that none of the new recruits had drawn in Stormlight yet, but by the end of the session Lyn was the first new recruit to do so. After a later training, Bridge Four gathered at Rock's cook fire to talk about fitting in, belonging, expectations, and how it sometimes made them feel alone. Afterwards Kaladin noticed Rlain sitting alone, and asked Rlain to explain how he felt. Arriving in Kholinar \n\nAfter his return, Elhokar asked Kaladin to join his mission to open the Kholinar Oathgate and transport the team by flying them with Lashings above the highstorm, which would constantly renew their Stormlight. Before doing so, Kaladin practiced transporting a large group in this manner by flying Dalinar, Navani, and others from the Oathgate in Stormseat to the warcamps, and by flying with Shallan to unlock the Thaylen City Oathgate after Queen Fen Rnamdi finally agrees to have it opened. Afterwards, Dalinar pulled Kaladin aside to inform him that as a Shardbearer, he was a lighteyes suitable to have a landed title. As such, he was granted an area of land on the Deathbend River. After travelling to Thaylen City, Kaladin, along with Elhokar, Adolin, Shallan, Skar, Drehy, Ishnah, and Vathah, undertook a trip atop the next highstorm, using it as fuel to travel from the Shattered Plains to Kholinar. Along the way, he noted that although he cannot reproduce his ability to influence the strength of the winds, he did create a sort of 'channel' that kept the group together as they flew. During the trip, he also briefly had a conversation with Syl about his interest in Shallan, after he reflected on how she seemed to embrace flying above the storms. Once the group arrived, they discussed the beauty of the storm, and Kaladin split from the group to scout below the clouds. Over Kholinar, he identified the banners of humans rulers, and noted the construction of Singer stormshelters. Kaladin finally gave in to his urge to gawk, but was alarmed by the dark aura around the palace. Returning to the group, he consulted them and the group decided to sneak into Kholinar, regardless of the fact that it was still in human hands. The group approached the city wearing disguises made by Shallan. Kaladin's illusion was particularly hideous. The king commanded Kaladin to succeed, believing that he himself would fail. The Wall Guard denied them entrance, but the group quickly entered when the guard was distracted by an attack of the Fused. Kaladin wanted to help the guards, but Adolin persuaded him to ignore it. They sheltered at Adolin's tailor's house, and made plans. Kaladin brought a letter from Elhokar to Shallan, for her to deliver to the palace. Meanwhile, he watched the palace and helped Shallan get back to the tailor's after she escaped. Infiltrating the Wall Guard \nDuring the next planning session, Elhokar charged Kaladin with infiltrating the Wall Guard. Adolin and Elhokar attended a lighteyes feast to gain contacts, and Kaladin went as the head of their guards. Before joining the lighteyed guard tent he went for a walk along the wall."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - A patrol of the guards met him, and immediately tried to recruit him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - They offered him a free meal, no strings attached. Over the meal, the guards tried to recruit Kaladin with offers of regular meals and comradery. They were willing to ignore any man's history so long as he was able and willing to fight with them. Later Highmarshal Azure came by on her daily round, and Kaladin was flabbergasted to discover she was a woman and the Wall Guard kept that secret. On Elhokar's orders, Kaladin joined the Wall Guard and went out with them on patrol. He quickly found a familiar sense of belonging with the squad and their banter. The squad helped deliver food to the city, followed by wall duty. Kaladin tried to get information about Azure out of the men. The wall was assaulted by the Fused and Kaladin started giving orders to get the defenders ready, but the attacks ended up elsewhere. Kaladin reported his findings to Adolin and Shallan while they waited out the highstorm in a winehouse. After the high storm, when his platoon was having dinner with Highmarshal Azure, Kaladin was sitting at the officers' table. The highmarshal and Kaladin had a barbed exchange, both trying to get information from the other without revealing anything themselves. They were interrupted when the wall was attacked. Kaladin and Azure charged up the stairs to the wall and focus on the defense. The guard was in chaos under the coordinated attack. Kaladin took charge of a platoon and in the following fight was drawn into a one-on-one fight with a Fused. He managed to kill the Fused and forced himself to use only the bare minimum of stormlight to heal himself after the encounter. The Wall Guards were in awe as it was the first Fused killed. After the battle, Azure pointed out he assembled Voidbringer army, ready for the assault. When she heard about his kill, he reveals he is here on orders of the king. He convinced the highmarshal to reveal the hidden room lined with aluminum where the Soulcasters are working. In return, Kaladin told about the Oathgate and how it is the only way to save the city. The Wall Guard send five to six hundred troops led by Azure and Kaladin to join the assault on the palace. Assault on the Royal Palace \nWhen readying for the assault, Elhokar gave Kaladin the duty to save the Queen and the heir. While the other with the troops storm the palace, Kaladin, Shallan, Skar, and Drehy used their Radiant powers to engage and distract the Fused. They seized the Sunwalk and the eastern gallery, using Shallan's illusions to fake their death, and meet the others in the palace. Kaladin joined Elhokar to lead a force, including Noro's squad, up the stairs to the royal chambers. They found the queen, who has lost her mind and joined the enemy. Kaladin searched the room and Syl found little Gavinor surrounded by red spren. Using his Sylblade Kaladin cut one of the spren, and scared off the other spren. Elhokar and Kaladin then fled down the palace followed by the Queen's Guard. They were met at the bottom by a group of parshaman, led by Sah, Kaladin's friend. Kaladin froze when he noticed he had friends in multiple of the fighting groups, the conflicting loyalties overwhelming him. He tried to stop the fighting, but his efforts were in vain. He was watching Elhokar starting to speak the First Ideal, when Moash came in and killed the king. Drehy, Skar, and Adolin enter just in time to save Kaladin and pull him to safety. Kaladin was in shock and watched while Shallan activated the Oathgate and the group ended up accidentally in Shadesmar. Trip through Shadesmar (1174) \nKaladin, Syl, Shallan, Pattern, Azure, Adolin, and his Blade's deadeye found themselves stranded in Shadesmar. Kaladin immediately drew in Stormlight and started hovering, however, this drew the attention of all nearby spren."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - At Syl's increasingly urgent requests, he let go of the Light. Kaladin was in a broody mood and barely talked, despite Adolin's urging, while the group made their way to the land that represented the Windrunner River in the Physical Realm. They made camp as they were all exhausted. The next morning, Kaladin was sitting on a rock watching the surroundings when Syl came to speak to him. She asked why he didn't sleep, and he evaded the question. She knew something was wrong with him, despite his denials. Later, Adolin started performing a morning kata; Azure joined him, as did Kaladin, who still struggles with the movements. The group discussed their supplies and strategy. Kaladin pressed to go back to the Oathgate to help the city. Moreover, he was shocked to learn about Shadesmar and the existence of spren cities among other things. The group marched along the peninsula corresponding to Windrunner River in the Physical Realm. Kaladin was frustrated and felt like they are abandoning Kholinar and its people, though was aware his thoughts were irrational and linked to his depression coming back. When they reached the lighthouse at the end of the peninsula, Kaladin tried to sneak up on it. As he attracted anticipationspren, he was quickly spotted by the lighthouse keeper, Riino. Riino believed Kaladin was there to have his fortune told, while Kaladin wanted to go and get the others. When he understood what Riino was talking about, Kaladin was aghast at the idea of seeing the future, and said they were looking for passage on a ship. Outside the clouds changed as a highstorm is passing in the Physical. Kaladin is attracted by the globe on the table which was shining brightly and touched it. He had a vision of Dalinar with nine shadows and the danger he was in, then a flash of Thaylen City. Later, Kaladin sat to recover while the others arranged passage and supplies. They debated the destination, but had to take the ship sailed by Reachers to Celebrant. The next morning, Kaladin woke up on the ship. The captain, Ico, took him to the hold to get the special device that could make water for the humans. He then talked with Syl, about the ship and why she was wearing a disguise. Shallan and Kaladin discussed spren and the weird ship. When arriving in Celebrant, the group split up; Kaladin went with Adolin and Syl to change money and buy supplies. Kaladin got distracted by a stall selling paintings, including a painting from the Court of Gods seemingly depicting a figure with nine shadows. The group soon discovered that the city was under control of the Fused."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - They narrowly escaped when Syl surrendered herself to a ship of honorspren. The honorspren sailed south-west, letting the group move freely on deck except Syl who was kept captive. Kaladin was very angry over Syl's imprisonment, and wanted to fight her free. Eventually, Kal went to the high deck to use a spyglass. After a conversation with Notum, the captain of the ship, Kaladin started contemplating the Windrunners' Ideals."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - He felt himself afraid of drawing closer to the Fourth Ideal because of what it might demand of him. This contemplation seemed to cause the first step of manifestating living Shardplate in the form of pinpricks of light trailing soft luminescence in the air next to him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - This made some mistspren gasp, whisper, and move away, presumably to fetch the captain. Kaladin was then also able to mentally communicate with Syl, who was still in the hold. The captain confirmed to him that the lights were windspren, an uncommon sight in Shadesmar, as they live almost completely in the Physical Realm. In this conversation with the captain, he revealed that Dalinar had bonded the Stormfather, which impressed the honorspren very much. Shortly thereafter, they spotted eight Fused in pursuit of the ship. They were close to Longbrow's Straits, here a land area, with Thaylen City on the other side. Using the bead of a room, Adolin, Shallan, Kaladin, and their spren snuck into the bead ocean while the honorspren and Azure held off the Fused. Kaladin flew them part of the distance, and the group had an exhausting hike across the land to get to the Thaylen City Oathgate, only to find it guarded. The group attacked the Oathgate in an attempt to get back to the Physical Realm. Kaladin used some of the remaining stormlight to attack the Fused, he managed to draw four into an extended chase. he managed to disarm one of them, and one of the others offered a challenge."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Exactly then his stormlight ran out, and he dropped into the beads. Syl pulled him out of the beads, and during the whole fight encouraged him to speak the fourth ideal. Kaladin wasn\'t ready yet. Battle of Thaylen Field (1174) \n\nDalinar then opened Honor\'s Perpendicularity, allowing Kaladin, along with Shallan and Adolin, to return to the Physical Realm. When appearing out of the perpendicularity Kaladin blocked Amaram\'s blow that was meant to kill Dalinar. Dalinar then ordered Kaladin to guard him and settle the score with Amaram. Kaladin set off into the sky, and felt at home again. He attacked Amaram, who was wielding two Shardblades and had a red glow in his helmet. Kaladin\'s fight was complicated as he also had to watch Dalinar, and defend him from Fused. Slowly Amaram was getting access to the Surges while he was transformed by Yelig-nar. Kaladin was surprised by those, and had trouble adjusting his attacks and defenses. During the fight, Kaladin was suddenly hit with a club by a Fused hidden nearby. Kaladin disabled the Fused\'s arms with his Shardblade, to focus on Amaram again. He fought alternating with Amaram and the Fused. Then Amaram launched into a lecture about honor, which Kaladin dismissed. Kaladin attacked again and broke the highlord\'s breastplate revealing a large crystal underneath. Kaladin attacked the gem and Amaram fell, followed by an attack of eight Fused. The fused swarmed Kaladin, and he tried to dodge them while keeping them engaged away from Dalinar. When Dalinar trapped the Thrill, the Fused fled and suddenly Amaram appeared again. Kaladin whispered "Bridge Four" when Amaram got shot by Rock with an arrow in the head. Afterwards, Lopen brought Stormlight to Kaladin to heal. Later, Kaladin sat down on a rooftop overlooking Thaylen City. He noticed Shallan kissing Adolin in an alley below. He showed Syl a rock he found on the battlefield, one that changed color when wet. They talked about the Recreance and what it means for the current Radiants. He flew to Bridge Four and had a heart to heart with Teft about the struggles of life.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Later a scout came with an urgent message. Kaladin flew over the ocean to southern Alethkar, where he found Skar and Drehy. They were hiding among the refugees together with little Gavinor. The War Continues (-) \nAs the war raged on, Kaladin was spread increasingly thin, which was only amplified by the fact that many of the original crew had started picking up squires of their own. In addition to splitting his time between battlefronts in southern Alethkar and Azir, he oversaw the Windrunner training at Urithiru and organized patrols to watch the coalition fleets from the skies.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - At some point, he was promoted to highmarshal. When Navani requested Windrunners to go on an expedition to Akinah to find the Oathgate there, Kaladin initially suggested sending Teft. Navani refused the suggestion due to the risk of sending a "key" to the Oathgate, in the form of a Shardblade, should it already be taken by the enemy. Instead, Kaladin sent Lopen, Huio, and Cord (who replaced Kaladin\'s original choice of Rock), telling them their mission was to see if the Oathgate was still functional and whether it has fallen into enemy hands. Evacuating Hearthstone \nA few months into the war, Kaladin flew to Hearthstone. It was a pre-arranged visit for him to meet and extract a rebel Herdazian general, who would be hidden by his parents. While Kaladin tried to sneak into the town as part of the line of refugees, multiple Fused had arrived. They were looking for someone with the Windrunner\'s description and they found him. Kaladin fought with this new type of Fused who could turn into a light, move quickly and turn back into a Fused. The Fused almost killed the Windrunner by repeatedly severing his spinal cord, but Kaladin managed to escape. They continued to fight, while Syl and Kal recognized it was a dangerous foe. Kaladin noticed that after three teleports the fused needs a break to get more Voidlight. After loosing the Fused, Stormblessed returned to Hearthstone and was suddenly exhausted. When Syl said they had shown him, Kaladin replied he was almost killed twice.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Syl then expressed a worry about Kaladin, who insisted he was fine. While approaching the town, Syl wondered why Kaladin had such trouble sleeping, as humans slept every day and even babies could do it. Kaladin had no reply and felt disconnected from others. At the town, Kal told the singer to fight him, or leave. Six fought him and one died, after which the rest retreated, and left with the others. Kaladin walked to where his mother was waiting and greeted his brother Oroden, who called him "Gagadin". His mother inquired after Lyn, and Syl replied she had broken up with Kal.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - His mother and Syl talk about him as he wouldn't talk about personal issues. He moved to the shed where his mother had hidden the Herdazian general. He found several guards but the general had sneaked off, so Kal asked the guards to pass the message with an invitation from Dalinar. Moving on, he was approached by his father who reprimanded him for not approaching covertly enough. The Windrunner cut the fight short and told his father to start packing. Knowing his parents would not leave the people of the town, he had brought an airship to evacuate them all. The highmarshal escorted his father up the ramp of the Fourth Bridge and introduced him to Dalinar and Navani. After Lirin left to inspect the accommodations, Kaladin apologized for his father's behavior which had been lacking in politeness. They quickly discuss the new Fused and the need to defend the ship, and Kal gets a new charge of Stormlight from the Bondsmith. He launched into the air, but not before touching the place where the old bridge was embedded in the deck. Kaladin organized his Windrunners while they watched the Heavenly Ones advance in the distance. He hoped Leshwi would be among them, as he looked forward to fighting her again. The Fused offered the Windrunners one-on-one combat, creating an organized battle field. Leshwi spotted the highmarshal and invited him for a duel. They fought in the sky with Leshwi leading and Kaladin pursuing. Their flight led them around the battlefield and through the town. When they got near the airship, the Fused slowed to inspect it more carefully. This gave Kaladin the opportunity to get a normal spear from Rock that he used a moment later to Lash towards the Heavenly One. With some fancy maneuvers, the Fused managed to escape, leaving Kaladin on the ground where Teft asked if he was alright. They exchanged status reports, and Kaladin ordered the Windrunners to fight defensively. A new Fused appeared and Kaladin accepted its challenge. Kaladin fought with the Fused, and was winning quite quickly as the enemy was using up his light rapidly. When Kaladin had him defeated, he decided to let the Fused go as killing him wouldn't help as he would be reborn soon. When the Fused dropped its spear and drifted away, Kaladin noticed a red light streaking for him and started evading instantly. Lyn swooped by checking in on him, and he sent her off with a message to look out for the teleporting Fused. Kaladin remarked to Syl how the others were checking in on him and flew to Dalinar, who was just getting a report from Roshone. The former citylord offered to accompany an Edgedancer to free prisoners from the manor's cellar. Syl made Kal admit that the man had improved despite Kal still hating him. Later Kaladin had to watch while Sigzil was fighting with Leshwi, who was clearly the more skilled. He found it very hard not to interfere and help his friend, despite knowing that breaking the rules would be bad for the bigger picture. In the end Leshwi defeated Sigzil but spared his life in return for the Fused Kaladin had spared. She then challenged the highmarshal."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - They fought and dashed through the air, and he noticed most of the fighting was over. They left the town, and the Windrunner realized he knew the terrain very well from his childhood. He used this knowledge to trick Leshwi and scored a hit on her.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Shortly after, they managed to stab each other at the same time, draining each other's Light."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - They both pulled out at the same moment and called it a draw.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - They scanned the terrain and noticed the Fused from before near the manor go after some civilians. Leshwi then gestured Kaladin to go and save the civilians. Near the manor, Kaladin noticed the strange Fused with a captured Godeke entering the building. He entered as well, and they fought while a Singer soldier activated a device that blocked the Radiants' powers. The Fused taunted Kaladin that without powers he was nothing, but the Windrunner used his experience and killed the soldiers and the Fused. Lift had slipped in and was helping Godeke leave, and Kal asked her to bring the device to Navani. Kaladin moved onward to the cellar where Roshone had gone. He ran through the flames into the tunnel to the cellar, where he found two prisoners already dead. He turned and found Moash, who held Roshone and slit the former city lord's throat. Moash asked whether Kal came to save one of his enemies. When Kaladin jumped to attack, Moash dismissed his Blade and surrendered. They then argued over whether Roshone and Elhokar deserved their fates. Then Moash started speaking in a fatalistic way, saying that everyone was going to die and no one could be saved. This hurt Kaladin and started to exaggerate his depression. The Windrunner froze when Moash outright suggested that Kaladin should kill himself. Then a light exploded in the room that created a vision of who Moash could have been: a Windrunner protecting people. This led Moash to flee, and the light faded to show Renarin, who took Kaladin back to the airship. Retirement \nThe airship had left Hearthstone by the time Kaladin started to come to himself. He looked so bad, one of the ardents brought him soup as if he were one of the refugees."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Even his Stormlight gave him no energy, and he became depressed thinking about failing Tien and Elhokar. When Syl informed him that Laran had sworn the Third Ideal, he didn't want to join the crowd to congratulate her. His spren noticed his darkness was stronger and didn't know how to help him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Teft came to see him and didn't let Kal send him away. He told the highmarshal he would go congratulate the Windrunner, and then they talked about Moash. The former sergeant also mentioned that Renarin had reported he had found Kaladin frozen in place again. Without answering, Kaladin got up and went to Laran to see her new Blade. Then he led the Windrunners that flew Dalinar and staff back to the Shattered Plains. When they approached the Shattered Plains, Kaladin was feeling a bit better. Syl came to him and brought Yunfah, the only unbound honorspren willing to bond a Radiant. Kaladin wanted the spren to consider Rlain, but the spren was hesitant. So Kaladin ordered him to try to bond with Rlain before bonding anyone else. The highmarshal then surveyed Narak while landing. He walked to where the Windrunners had landed their passengers and asked Dalinar to go back to Urithiru. The king denied it as he wanted to speak to Kaladin. They spoke about the war, tactics against the Heavenly Ones, and the need for more Windrunners."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Syl explained the other honorspren found the humans dangerous. The king praised the highmarshal for building up the Windrunners as military force and then relieved him of duty. Kaladin was distressed and at first disagreed, but after a heated argument he had to agree he needed a break from active duty. He wondered what if something happened to one of the others because he wasn't there, to which Dalinar countered by asking what if something happened because he was there and froze. Dalinar let him keep his rank and offered him a position in training the new forces. Kaladin wasn't sure that was right, and he was allowed some time to think on how he wanted to contribute. After they took the Oathgate to Urithiru, Kaladin was thinking about how he had almost no squires left, as most of Bridge Four had become Knights and taken their own squires. Many of them invited Kaladin to join them for one activity or the other, but he declined them all and wanted to be alone. The moment he stepped into his rooms he broke."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - He sank down next to the door, and his emotions overwhelmed him, with the exhaustion and agony washing over him. He thought again about Moash's words, about how everyone was going to die and he would not be able to stop it. He was taken out of his thoughts when someone started knocking on the door."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - It was Adolin, who had been fetched by Syl. The highprince insisted that Kaladin join him for an evening out and wasn't accepting any more excuses. Kaladin was forced to admit he shouldn't be left alone that night, and when they left he did thank Syl. Adolin took them to his favorite winehouse, Jez's Duty, where he had his own booth at which Veil was sitting already. When the barmaid came, he ordered an orange wine, as he knew alcohol would be bad for him in his current mood. Veil and Kaladin exchanged reports on their respective missions. Radiant took over and explained that they had found a balance as the Three, but that there was more going on with her. Kaladin admitted he wasn't sure he could help, as he could barely keep it together himself. Adolin returned, and he and Veil talked about the ongoing wedding party and how Kaladin didn't notice the bar staff. Veil changed the topic of the conversation to finding someone to set up with Kaladin, to the Windrunner's horror. Adolin and Veil took turns suggesting women, and Kal rejected them all. This went on until Veil left to get another drink."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - After a bit of silence, Adolin sat closer to Kaladin. He asked what was going on, and eventually Kaladin admitted he had been relieved of duty. Adolin responded supportively and even allowed that his father could be wrong. He did not know how to, but he wanted to help, thinking that it might also provide him with a way to help Shallan. The highprince eventually got Kaladin to give him some advice on how to help Shallan, and Kaladin's suggestions were exactly the things Adolin had been doing for him that night. The bridgeboy called his companion a fool and suggested they needed to get him a spren, saying that getting rid of his Shardblade would help; Adolin refused this adamantly. Later, Veil joined them and the evening went on. Two hours later, when Rock came to the booth, Adolin and Veil left to let them speak alone. Kaladin tried to avoid the conversation, but Rock insisted as Kaladin had refused several times before. Rock agreed it had been good to wait and give his family time to rest, but now he had to return to his people. He had to face the consequences of his action of lifting the bow to save Kaladin's life. Kal warned him about  Moash, but Skar and Drehy had agreed to escort Rock and his family to the peaks. Kaladin considered going with them, but he realized it would not solve his problems. They embraced in a final farewell, as Rock didn't expect to come back from his journey. Ten days after the return from Hearthstone, Kaladin attended a ceremony where Sigzil was promoted to run the daily business of the Windrunners while Skar was promoted to lead the missions. The highmarshal was still figuring out what new role would suit him. He went to the sparring grounds looking for Zahel, but the swordmaster was out on the field, as he had laundry detail that day. While walking to the field, Kaladin made a short detour to visit Rlain on the growing fields. The listener was overseeing the use of gemstones to aid growth of crops. Rlain complained that humans could not hear the rhythms nor sing the pure tones."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Despite that they were making progress. Kaladin told Rlain that Yunfah would try to bond with him. When Rlain learned the spren had been pressured, he didn't want the bond. He then told Kaladin how he became a bridgeman simply because he answered a question from his master. Kaladin found the swordmaster along the laundry lines. He told Zahel about his retirement and asked in a circumspect way if he could join the swordmasters. They discuss reasons to retire, and then Zahel demanded Kaladin fight him. They fought between the laundry lines, with Zahel evading Kaladin while making use of the sheets and a bunch of colorful scarfs. During the fight, the swordmaster continued to question the Radiant on his motives. When Kaladin was defeated, Zahel declared that he could not join the ardents, as Kaladin still loved the fight. They moved to the edge of the plateau, and Zahel gave Kaladin a lecture on Realmatic Theory, explaining how he, the Heralds, and the Fused were all Type Two Invested entities. He told him that one would need a special weapon that could unravel their souls to kill them, and those weapons are dangerous. Surgeon and Mental Health work \nSome days later, Kaladin used the Oathgate to travel to the Shattered Plains while he contemplated what role he wanted. He had come to meet the Fourth Bridge and the refugees from Hearthstone on it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - He took his parents to Urithiru and gave them a tour of the quarters set aside for the people from Hearthstone. His parents and Syl exchanged joyful banter while they moved about. After looking through the communal spaces, Syl and Kal showed Lirin and Hesina the suite of rooms they had prepared for the family, including a fully-stocked surgery room. Despite the fact that it was stocked with the best and newest inventory, Lirin felt it was useless, as the Radiants had superseded the need for surgeons. Kaladin disagreed and explained that as they had very few Radiants who could heal, normal surgeons were still very much needed. At Syl\'s prodding, Kaladin revealed that he had retired, and his father immediately concluded that Kaladin would start working with him again as a surgeon. Before leaving with the envoy to the honorspren, Adolin came by the clinic to say goodbye to Kaladin. Adolin noticed a long line of mostly women waiting to be helped and told Kaladin that he was now Alethkar\'s most eligible bachelor. Syl explained how this new job was helping Kal. The highprince shared some advice from Zahel about war and suggested they spar when he came back. Kaladin continued to work as a surgeon, which kept him busy and made him "not sad." When the girl who was reading for him left, Syl suddenly started to read the medical reference book for Kaladin, she had learned to read the week before. During a break on one of the balconies, he saw a group of Windrunners flew by and gave him a salute.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - On his return his next patients was Teft, who couldn't leave with the army."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - He has had enough of the war and his struggle with his addiction. They argued a bit, but Kaladin had to accept Teft who would not leave him alone. Kaladin and Teft went to track down a patient who had come through the surgery a while ago. He had been sent to the ardents who after a suicide attempt send him to the Devotary of Mercy.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - The bridgemen found the monastery and a dark corridor full of people in solitary confinement.They were shocked and questioned the treatment, which was defended by the ardent. Kaladin talked to the patient Noril, and could relate to his depression. Against the ardents protests, they took Noril to a balcony to talk and exchanged experiences. Kaladin then talked to the ardent who said this wasn't in the book of treatments.They had only one treatment for all patients, and Kaladin realized different illnesses need different responses. He was going to try something new. Kaladin started his efforts by focusing on the men with similar symptoms as Noril, battle fatigue, nightmares and melancholy. He organized a group therapy session where they could exchange experiences. His mother was impressed by the results, and Kaladin explained how it was important to be able to speak with someone who actually understood what you felt. And for them to not just know but feel that they weren't alone. Some time later, Lirin and Kaladin discussed the treatment of the patients. Lirin explained how he did not know how little they knew about mental health. Kaladin followed up that the social stigma had prevented research taking place. He wanted a medical revolution, but his father cautioned that change was hard. While they talk, Kaladin slowly realized he could have ended up in the sanatorium. Then Teft came in telling that Dabbid had been missing for three days. They went to search. Teft and Kaladin went to the winehouse for drinks, both sticking to orange. Shortly after, they were joined by Rlain, the whole place falling silent when he entered. They talked about the war and their time running bridges. Then they talked about Dabbid and how Kaladin thought the meetings might be helpful for him. The others including Syl make clear they think Kaladin himself should also join them."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - He admitted it was helping him. Capture of Urithiru \nWhile still at a tavern in Urithiru, the capture of Urithiru began when Teft fell unconscious and slipped into a coma. Kaladin, while feeling some effects from the Sibling's corruption, turned out to be the only Radiant who remained conscious still in the tower due to how close he was to his Fourth Ideal. When Kaladin took Teft to the clinic that Lirin ran he discovered several other Radiants unconscious. Kaladin wanted to resist against the invaders initially, but was convinced to stand down knowing what may happen to his family if he were discovered. During the first day of the invasion, he went delivering supplies and news to the people of Hearthstone, staying up through the night helping others. However, when several Regal and singer soldiers were going around the tower collecting fallen Radiants, Kaladin could not risk them taking Teft, and he fought back and killed a Regal. He and Lirin argued, and Kaladin was told to go; to attempt to protect his family, Kaladin took Teft and ran into hiding. With the help of Syl, Kaladin went far up into the tower, as far away from other people as possible, but was chased by the Pursuer. With what would be revealed to be the help of the Sibling, he was lead to a hidden room for refuge. Kaladin continued to experience severe nightmares and visions while in hiding. After waking for the first time in hiding, he realized he needed a way to gather supplies so he could resist the Fused and take care of Teft. Kaladin, with the help of Syl, snuck around the tower gathering Stormlight and approached Kuno to ask him for supplies and ensure he could help him in the future. Once he returned to his hiding spot, Navani contacted Kaladin for the first time through the Sibling's veins throughout the tower. Together they developed a plan to scout the Oathgates and determine how the Fused were able to work them even with Kaladin's powers not working as they should. While taking care of Teft, Dabbid was able to find the hidden room with the help of the Sibling. Kaladin felt a sense of relief knowing that Teft would not die if Kaladin died or was captured; he put Dabbid to work taking care of Teft while Kaladin went on his mission to observe the Oathgate. When night fell, Kaladin went with Syl to spy on the Oathgates. He had to climb the side of the tower to avoid being spotted since his Lashings were not working to their fullest capacity. He saw the Oathgate flash with Voidlight that night and determined that they would probably use the Oathgates as infrequently as possible to avoid being spotted. Kaladin decided to steal a spanreed the Fused were using to gather information. Syl changed colors to mimic a Voidspren in order to distract the singer guards so Kaladin could steal a spanreed. Just as Kaladin got matching spanreeds, the Sibling begged for his help; one of their nodes had been discovered by the Fused."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin, unsure whether he was risking exposing himself to the Pursuer, decided to find the node anyways. When finding the location of the node, Raboniel allowed the Pursuer to attack Kaladin while she corrupted the Sibling. Kaladin tricked the Pursuer into being locked into another hidden room of Urithiru and was able to destroy the node to minimize the Sibling's corruption. By the time Kaladin was able to stop Raboniel, he noticed a considerable difference in his healing in particular, especially after Raboniel injured him to observe how his powers were fairing."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - Raboniel allowed Kaladin to escape, and he ran back to the hidden room and collapsed. Navani came up with the idea of using the glove created by her ardent Tomor for Kaladin to use in replacement of his missing Lashings, and with some training, he was able to use it in combat. The Sibling sensed that the Fused had found their node in the well on the main floor of Urithiru, and while Kaladin was trapped in another nightmare, Dabbid nearly went in his place to protect the node. Once awake, Kaladin hurried to the main floor, and there the Pursuer was once again waiting for him. While fighting the Pursuer, Kaladin challenged Leshwi to a duel, knowing that a fight with her would be more honorable and would keep the Pursuer at bay. Kaladin, with the help of Syl, aimed himself towards the well, to avoid further injuring himself after going through a loophole to avoid a true duel with Leshwi. Kaladin was able to swim with help from Tomor\'s device and destroyed the node in the well. Unfortunately the Sibling\'s corruption had gone so far that his healing was nearly gone, which was especially noticeable since Raboniel had injured him again. Kaladin went to escape the well, knowing he would be surrounded by Fused, but he and Syl were separated and the Pursuer locked him in by adding weights to the top of the well. Kaladin escaped to the underground reservoir and attempted to get to his hidden room but was at risk of being surrounded by singers. Instead, he escaped to the outside of the tower during a highstorm to wait for his Stormlight to renew. While on the side of the tower, Dalinar was able to contact Kaladin through the highstorm; after falling unconscious, Dalinar pushed him into the tower using the winds. Kaladin was taken back to the hidden room by Dabbid, but he fell into a coma, having his consciousness taken to Braize by Odium. During this time on Braize, Kaladin found Wit, who created a bubble of protection to prevent Odium from discovering him for a short amount of time and told Kaladin the story "The Dog and the Dragon". Dabbid went to ask for help from Rlain, as he believed Kaladin was dying, and Venli helped get Lift out of her prison to heal Kaladin. Lift healed both Kaladin and Teft, and they began to develop a plan to protect the Sibling\'s final node. When they learned that the final node was in danger, exhausted, Kaladin went to face the Pursuer once more with the remnants of Bridge Four, Lift, and Venli. Kaladin destroyed the Pursuer\'s reputation, deeming him "the Defeated One", and defeated him by humiliating him. But, after feeling energized, he discovered Teft dead by the hand of Vyre and was rendered catatonic. The 4th Ideal () \nAfter Teft was killed by Vyre, Kaladin became emotionally broken. He killed the Pursuer in a rage, while a Heavenly One took Lirin up to the top of Urithiru. Kaladin followed, using Navani\'s fabrial, whereupon the Heavenly One grew frightened and dropped Lirin. Kaladin stood atop Urithiru, watching Lirin fall, and realized why he came to the top of the tower. At Honor\'s Chasm, he chose life, and so this time, he made the opposite choice: he jumped, attempting suicide. However, Dalinar, riding the storm at the time, demanded that the Stormfather give Kaladin more time to think.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content='Kaladin - The Stormfather took Kaladin into the "place between time" and talked to him, albeit unsuccessfully. Dalinar, using his Bondsmith abilities, took Kaladin into a vision connected to Tien. The apparition of Tien convinced Kaladin to embrace the moment and accept that all people must eventually die, admitting that he chose to be used as cannon fodder to cheer up the other boys. Returning to the real world with newfound sense of peace, Kaladin kept falling, but found the strength to declare his Fourth Ideal. Rather than the Stormfather, it was Dalinar who accepted Kaladin\'s words. Around Kaladin, windspren transformed into his Shardplate. Teft\'s Funeral \nKaladin attended Teft\'s funeral after the Fused were fully exiled from Urithiru. He left the gathering early to try to speak with Dalinar, who attempted to apologize for forcing him to retire from military duty.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '92c6913b-abd0-4bc7-a681-7f5260555750'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin stopped him, affirming that it was the right choice, and requested that he be allowed to continue furthering his pursuit in the burgeoning field of mental health. Dalinar accepted this request and also returned his Trailman's flute, which was thought to be lost until Lift found in the Breakaway market. After their conversation, Kaladin and Syl went to the Breakaway market to look through the merchant's bins where Lift found the flute. He found a carved wooden horse that Tien had given him just before they entered the army. He was shocked to see it in Urithiru, as he had lost it in Alethkar. Remembering Tien through it, Kaladin decided to buy the horse off the merchant. Following this, he went to the tavern to attend a group therapy session, like he had promised Teft."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early Life (1153-1168)', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd32f780-93f1-412d-b730-3e215c2838de'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Early Life (1153-1168) \n Early childhood \n\nKaladin was born in late 1153 to Lirin and Hesina, a family of second nahn, in the town of Hearthstone in Torol Sadeas' princedom in northwestern Alethkar. His younger brother, Tien was born two years later. Growing up, Kaladin preferred the shorter name Kal to his full name, which he felt sounded like a lighteyes’s name. At the age of eight, Kal began training with his father in surgery, though he dreamed of becoming a soldier."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early Life (1153-1168)', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd32f780-93f1-412d-b730-3e215c2838de'}, page_content='Kaladin - At first, he became sick at the sight of wounds and injuries.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early Life (1153-1168)', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd32f780-93f1-412d-b730-3e215c2838de'}, page_content="Kaladin - Over the next couple of years, he grew used to the sight and assisted his father during surgeries which he figured would come in handy on the battlefield. However, the amount of time Lirin spent with books and sick people, coupled with their class disparity, made people uncomfortable to be around Lirin and Kal, by association. As a result of his isolated upbringing, Kal became very close with his brother and, at the encouragement of his parents, Laral Wistiow, the daughter of the citylord. Surgeon or Soldier \nIn , Kal assisted his father in amputating one of the fingers of a fifteen-year old girl named Sani. Once finished, Lirin asked Kal why he was late. Kal admitted it was because he went with Tien to see what Jam, a boy two years older, had learned from his quarterstaff training. Kal was excited because Jam’s father was a soldier in Brightlord Amaram’s army. Lirin replied that he knew Jam’s father, having operated on his leg three times, a “gift” from his time as a soldier. Kal argued they needed soldiers, but Lirin claimed they needed surgeons more. Lirin doubted that his son could actually hurt someone as he cried nearly every time someone was brought to them. Kal promised he would get stronger causing Lirin to ask who put these ideas in his head. Kal countered that it was about honor and that no one told stories about surgeons. Lirin told him there were two kinds of people in the world, those who save lives and those who take lives, that one couldn’t protect by killing. Lirin then informed Kal that once he turned sixteen, he wanted to send Kaladin to train with real surgeons in Kharbranth. Lirin told Kal he had a gift from the Heralds and he didn’t need to waste it on the small dreams of other men. Two years later, Kal and Laral were talking somewhere east of Hearthstone while Tien gathered rocks nearby. Kal told her of his father’s plans to send him to Kharbranth to train to become a surgeon. Hurt, Laral asked why he hadn’t told her. He lied, saying he didn’t think his father was serious. Laral wondered about his previous plans to be a soldier. His expression became gloomy as he was conflicted on which path to choose, surgeon or soldier. Sensing his distress, Tien ran up to Kal with a rock that he found, giving it to Kal to make him feel better. Kal did feel better and went with Tien to find a lurg. Laral rejoined them, commenting that Tien changed Kal for the better. Laral continued to encourage Kal to become a soldier, and that he shouldn't let his father force him to do something he didn't want to. She even implied he could marry her if he won a Shardblade. Kal replied he still had time to decide as they wouldn't take him until he was sixteen. Later, they encountered a group of older boys, one of whom made the claim his father won a Shardblade in the wastescum skirmishes. At Laral’s prompting, Kal contradicted him, which led to the boy, Jost, challenging Kal to a quarterstaff fight. Although it was his first time holding a weapon, his natural talent for combat manifested. However, seeing that he hurt Jost, he stopped himself from fighting anymore. Jost, having no similar inhibition, beat Kal to the ground. Kal then asked Jost to teach him, but the older boy declined, telling Kal to “go be what you are.” Joined by Tien, Kal made his way home, where Lirin informed Kal that Citylord Wistiow had died and bequeathed a goblet full of spheres to Kal so he could study in Kharbranth. Two months later, thirteen-year-old Kal attempted to treat a five-year-old girl named Miasal on his own. Kal started treating her, but it was too late as Miasal died from blood loss due to multiple severe wounds. An hour later, his father found Kal in front of the surgery room crying to himself. Lirin told him that he was proud of Kal’s work and there was nothing he could have done to stop Miasal’s death. Kal confessed to Lirin that he doesn’t want to be a surgeon, but Lirin just answered that he would have to learn when to care. Near the end of , Kal was walking through the city of Hearthstone when he overheard two women claiming that his father stole the spheres from Citylord Wistiow upon his death. Gritting his teeth and knowing that was his father, Kal stepped out of the alleyway and gave one of the women a sharp look, causing both to flee inside the bakery. His satisfaction was short-lived as he didn’t understand why people said such things about his father."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early Life (1153-1168)', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd32f780-93f1-412d-b730-3e215c2838de'}, page_content='Kaladin - He was still stewing when he turned a few corners, walking to where his mother stood on a stepladder. When Hesina asked about his lessons, he blurted out that everyone hated his father and that they believed he stole the spheres from Wistiow. He also lamented that he didn’t have friends and asked what would happen if he wanted to become something other than a surgeon. Hesina reminded him that he had Tien and that he shouldn’t be so quick to discard his studies because he wanted to be like the others. She also told him not to hate the townspeople as they were just repeating what they had heard. Seeing her glance to the citylord’s manor, Kal debated whether or not he should try to see Laral again. Each time he had tried, he’d been turned away by her nurse. He wondered what it would be like marrying Laral and if he did, would he always feel inferior to her. He was still considering this fact and debating whether or not to be a surgeon or a soldier when Lirin ran in declaring the new citylord had arrived. Desperate times \nKal went with his parents to the town square to await the arrival of Citylord Roshone. Tien was already there, having already picked out a spot.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early Life (1153-1168)', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd32f780-93f1-412d-b730-3e215c2838de'}, page_content='Kaladin - As Tien ran by, some older boys made an unintelligible remark about him which made Kal furious, wanting to confront them, but knowing it wasn’t a good time. Kal joined Tien to view the procession of a dozen wagons and a carriage. The carriage stopped and a middle-aged man stepped out.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early Life (1153-1168)', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd32f780-93f1-412d-b730-3e215c2838de'}, page_content='Kaladin - The lighteyed man scanned the crowd with a distasteful look on his face before turning to climb back into his carriage without addressing the crowd. Before he could, Lirin called out, trying to welcome him to Hearthstone, introducing himself as the town’s surgeon. Roshone responded by blaming Lirin as the reason he ended up in “this pitiful miserable quarter of the kingdom.”\n\nCitylord Roshone’s arrival brought great misfortune to Kal’s family. Believing that Lirin had stolen the spheres from Wistiow, he coerced the townspeople to stop making donations for Lirin’s work, which was the primary source of the family’s income. While the townsfolk acquiesced, they still secretly provided provisions to Lirin and Hesina. One night while drunk, Lirin told his son not to make the same mistakes he did and get sucked back into this tiny, foolish town. Kal argued that Lirin had always told him to come back, but Lirin admitted he’d been an idiot when he said that, adding that the townspeople didn’t want him there. Kal asked him why they couldn’t just spend the spheres, but his father said the spheres were for his education. Besides, if they did spend them, they would be doing exactly what Roshone wanted them to do. Instead, they did the best with what they had with Kal continuing his studies, Hesina taking on random jobs, and Tien apprenticing with Ral, a carpenter in town. At the same time, Kal was secretly still trying to decide what path he would take in the next several months, that of a surgeon or a spearman. A series of thumps interrupted Kal’s thoughts, sending him scrambling out of his chair. His father pulled open the door revealing not a monster, but three masked men demanding the spheres. However, they weren’t the highwaymen as Kaladin initially thought, but rather Luten, Horl, and Balsas, normal townsmen presumably hired by Roshone. Ashamed and caught off guard, the men left without taking anything.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early Life (1153-1168)', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd32f780-93f1-412d-b730-3e215c2838de'}, page_content='Kaladin - Half a year later, Roshone invited Lirin to the mansion for dinner. Although Lirin and Hesina tried to hide the meeting from him, Kal found out and attended, wanting to support his father if he confronted the citylord. As they rode through the city, Kal asked his father why they tried to hide the meeting. Lirin admitted that he wasn’t sure if he even wanted to attend as a part of him just wanted to take the family and flee to Kharbranth or another Alethi town. Lirin confessed that he had tried to leave once, but there was a tie between a man’s heart and his home and he couldn’t bring himself to leave. Having cared for the townspeople for so long, he couldn’t leave them in the hands of Roshone. Once they arrived, the pair were led to a dining room where Roshone was already eating. A servant gestured to a side table set up in a room off the main dining hall, but Lirin sat down at Roshone’s table insisting that he was of second nahn and surely he could have a place at his table. Not wasting any time, Roshone discussed their present situation and asked them to return the spheres, ending their defiance. When Kal responded with an outburst, Lirin sent him away to the kitchens. There, Roshone’s son, Rillir walked in with Laral, and confusing Kaladin for a servant, ordered him to fetch their supper. Kal, protesting that he wasn’t a servant, lost an argument over his calling with Rillir, leaving him humiliated. As Lirin and Kal left the mansion, the latter admitted to his father that he had been considering joining the army. However, he had resolved to becoming a surgeon so that he would have the education to stand up to the lighteyes. During their conversation, Kal saw something unfamiliar in his father’s eyes, guilt. He then realized that Lirin had indeed stolen the spheres from Wistiow, changing everything, but also changing nothing. He resolved to use the spheres for his training, but would eventually pay them back to Laral. Somebody has to start \n\nWhile on a hunting trip, Roshone and Rillir were seriously injured by a whitespine and brought to Lirin’s surgery room. Kaladin and Lirin determined that Rillir’s injuries were already fatal and tended to Roshone despite his protests. They anesthetized both patients, Roshone for surgery and Rillir for mercy. During the procedure, Lirin hesitated when he discovered a piece of the whitespine’s tusk near Roshone’s femoral artery. Kaladin considered how easy it would be to fake an accident, but they continued on to save Roshone’s life as Rillir died. When Kaladin asked his father why he did not let Roshone die, Lirin answered that they have to be better men than the lighteyes. A decision made \nIn the Weeping of , Kaladin found himself increasingly hoping for the sun and the wind again, the weather making it difficult for him to get things done. One day, when Kaladin was lying on the roof during the rain after repairing a leak, Tien called up to him, wanting to join him. While Kaladin didn’t think anyone else could cheer him up, he knew Tien could because somehow he just always knew the right thing to do. At first, it was just the two of them sitting in silence. Then, Tien presented Kaladin with a gift, an intricately carved horse that he made at Ral’s shop. Kaladin asked if he showed the beautiful horse to Ral, but Tien confessed that it got him into trouble because it wasn’t useful. Not a bit discouraged, Tien said he would make him proud tomorrow by finishing a chair. Kaladin found himself amazed at his brother’s ability to smile even in the darkest of times, swearing things grew brighter around them in that moment. However, it was short-lived as Kaladin admitted his concerns about their father having to spend the spheres to not only Tien, but also his mother. Hesina promised him that there would be enough spheres for him to go to Kharbranth in two months. Kaladin suggested that perhaps the entire family should come with him, not wanting to leave them behind, especially with Roshone “strangling” them. Hesina informed Kaladin that they only spent the spheres to make Roshone think he was winning, not because they needed to. Once Kaladin left, the spheres would be safe in the hands of the ardents while he studied to become a surgeon. However, Hesina reminded him that that his life was his own and that he didn’t have to become a surgeon to make them proud. They sat for awhile, Kaladin considering her words and what Tien could possibly like about the rain, when Lirin came with news that there was a gathering in the square. Roshone assembled the townsfolk as Meridas Amaram, a general for Highprince Sadeas, had arrived in Hearthstone to recruit soldiers for the army. There, Kaladin and his family were shocked to learn that Laral was now engaged to Roshone himself after Rillir’s death. Meanwhile, since only six men had volunteered, Amaram asked Roshone to announce the list of conscripts. As citylord, Roshone was barred from placing Lirin or Kaladin on the conscription list because they served a vital function to the town. However, Roshone placed Tien’s name on the list instead. When Kaladin tried to take his brother’s place, he was denied because the law gave the choice to Roshone alone. Left with no other option, Kaladin enlisted in the army in order to protect Tien and promised his devastated parents that he would bring Tien back safely in four years. Amaram also promised Lirin that he would make Tien a messenger boy for a while.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early childhood', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '550ae365-d92c-4348-ad7a-1edcdaf856e9'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Early childhood \n\nKaladin was born in late 1153 to Lirin and Hesina, a family of second nahn, in the town of Hearthstone in Torol Sadeas' princedom in northwestern Alethkar. His younger brother, Tien was born two years later. Growing up, Kaladin preferred the shorter name Kal to his full name, which he felt sounded like a lighteyes’s name. At the age of eight, Kal began training with his father in surgery, though he dreamed of becoming a soldier. At first, he became sick at the sight of wounds and injuries."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early childhood', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '550ae365-d92c-4348-ad7a-1edcdaf856e9'}, page_content='Kaladin - Over the next couple of years, he grew used to the sight and assisted his father during surgeries which he figured would come in handy on the battlefield. However, the amount of time Lirin spent with books and sick people, coupled with their class disparity, made people uncomfortable to be around Lirin and Kal, by association. As a result of his isolated upbringing, Kal became very close with his brother and, at the encouragement of his parents, Laral Wistiow, the daughter of the citylord.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgeon or Soldier', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f127d61e-64d0-489f-9a4a-2e75c002c90e'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Surgeon or Soldier \nIn , Kal assisted his father in amputating one of the fingers of a fifteen-year old girl named Sani. Once finished, Lirin asked Kal why he was late.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgeon or Soldier', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f127d61e-64d0-489f-9a4a-2e75c002c90e'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kal admitted it was because he went with Tien to see what Jam, a boy two years older, had learned from his quarterstaff training. Kal was excited because Jam’s father was a soldier in Brightlord Amaram’s army. Lirin replied that he knew Jam’s father, having operated on his leg three times, a “gift” from his time as a soldier. Kal argued they needed soldiers, but Lirin claimed they needed surgeons more. Lirin doubted that his son could actually hurt someone as he cried nearly every time someone was brought to them. Kal promised he would get stronger causing Lirin to ask who put these ideas in his head. Kal countered that it was about honor and that no one told stories about surgeons. Lirin told him there were two kinds of people in the world, those who save lives and those who take lives, that one couldn’t protect by killing. Lirin then informed Kal that once he turned sixteen, he wanted to send Kaladin to train with real surgeons in Kharbranth. Lirin told Kal he had a gift from the Heralds and he didn’t need to waste it on the small dreams of other men. Two years later, Kal and Laral were talking somewhere east of Hearthstone while Tien gathered rocks nearby. Kal told her of his father’s plans to send him to Kharbranth to train to become a surgeon. Hurt, Laral asked why he hadn’t told her. He lied, saying he didn’t think his father was serious. Laral wondered about his previous plans to be a soldier. His expression became gloomy as he was conflicted on which path to choose, surgeon or soldier. Sensing his distress, Tien ran up to Kal with a rock that he found, giving it to Kal to make him feel better. Kal did feel better and went with Tien to find a lurg. Laral rejoined them, commenting that Tien changed Kal for the better. Laral continued to encourage Kal to become a soldier, and that he shouldn't let his father force him to do something he didn't want to. She even implied he could marry her if he won a Shardblade. Kal replied he still had time to decide as they wouldn't take him until he was sixteen. Later, they encountered a group of older boys, one of whom made the claim his father won a Shardblade in the wastescum skirmishes. At Laral’s prompting, Kal contradicted him, which led to the boy, Jost, challenging Kal to a quarterstaff fight. Although it was his first time holding a weapon, his natural talent for combat manifested. However, seeing that he hurt Jost, he stopped himself from fighting anymore."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgeon or Soldier', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f127d61e-64d0-489f-9a4a-2e75c002c90e'}, page_content='Kaladin - Jost, having no similar inhibition, beat Kal to the ground. Kal then asked Jost to teach him, but the older boy declined, telling Kal to “go be what you are.” Joined by Tien, Kal made his way home, where Lirin informed Kal that Citylord Wistiow had died and bequeathed a goblet full of spheres to Kal so he could study in Kharbranth. Two months later, thirteen-year-old Kal attempted to treat a five-year-old girl named Miasal on his own. Kal started treating her, but it was too late as Miasal died from blood loss due to multiple severe wounds. An hour later, his father found Kal in front of the surgery room crying to himself. Lirin told him that he was proud of Kal’s work and there was nothing he could have done to stop Miasal’s death. Kal confessed to Lirin that he doesn’t want to be a surgeon, but Lirin just answered that he would have to learn when to care. Near the end of , Kal was walking through the city of Hearthstone when he overheard two women claiming that his father stole the spheres from Citylord Wistiow upon his death. Gritting his teeth and knowing that was his father, Kal stepped out of the alleyway and gave one of the women a sharp look, causing both to flee inside the bakery. His satisfaction was short-lived as he didn’t understand why people said such things about his father.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgeon or Soldier', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f127d61e-64d0-489f-9a4a-2e75c002c90e'}, page_content='Kaladin - He was still stewing when he turned a few corners, walking to where his mother stood on a stepladder. When Hesina asked about his lessons, he blurted out that everyone hated his father and that they believed he stole the spheres from Wistiow. He also lamented that he didn’t have friends and asked what would happen if he wanted to become something other than a surgeon. Hesina reminded him that he had Tien and that he shouldn’t be so quick to discard his studies because he wanted to be like the others. She also told him not to hate the townspeople as they were just repeating what they had heard. Seeing her glance to the citylord’s manor, Kal debated whether or not he should try to see Laral again. Each time he had tried, he’d been turned away by her nurse. He wondered what it would be like marrying Laral and if he did, would he always feel inferior to her. He was still considering this fact and debating whether or not to be a surgeon or a soldier when Lirin ran in declaring the new citylord had arrived.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Desperate times', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1353d404-568a-4e01-8380-6c38aa275389'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Desperate times \nKal went with his parents to the town square to await the arrival of Citylord Roshone. Tien was already there, having already picked out a spot.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Desperate times', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1353d404-568a-4e01-8380-6c38aa275389'}, page_content='Kaladin - As Tien ran by, some older boys made an unintelligible remark about him which made Kal furious, wanting to confront them, but knowing it wasn’t a good time. Kal joined Tien to view the procession of a dozen wagons and a carriage. The carriage stopped and a middle-aged man stepped out.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Desperate times', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1353d404-568a-4e01-8380-6c38aa275389'}, page_content='Kaladin - The lighteyed man scanned the crowd with a distasteful look on his face before turning to climb back into his carriage without addressing the crowd. Before he could, Lirin called out, trying to welcome him to Hearthstone, introducing himself as the town’s surgeon. Roshone responded by blaming Lirin as the reason he ended up in “this pitiful miserable quarter of the kingdom.”\n\nCitylord Roshone’s arrival brought great misfortune to Kal’s family. Believing that Lirin had stolen the spheres from Wistiow, he coerced the townspeople to stop making donations for Lirin’s work, which was the primary source of the family’s income. While the townsfolk acquiesced, they still secretly provided provisions to Lirin and Hesina. One night while drunk, Lirin told his son not to make the same mistakes he did and get sucked back into this tiny, foolish town. Kal argued that Lirin had always told him to come back, but Lirin admitted he’d been an idiot when he said that, adding that the townspeople didn’t want him there. Kal asked him why they couldn’t just spend the spheres, but his father said the spheres were for his education. Besides, if they did spend them, they would be doing exactly what Roshone wanted them to do. Instead, they did the best with what they had with Kal continuing his studies, Hesina taking on random jobs, and Tien apprenticing with Ral, a carpenter in town. At the same time, Kal was secretly still trying to decide what path he would take in the next several months, that of a surgeon or a spearman. A series of thumps interrupted Kal’s thoughts, sending him scrambling out of his chair. His father pulled open the door revealing not a monster, but three masked men demanding the spheres. However, they weren’t the highwaymen as Kaladin initially thought, but rather Luten, Horl, and Balsas, normal townsmen presumably hired by Roshone. Ashamed and caught off guard, the men left without taking anything. Half a year later, Roshone invited Lirin to the mansion for dinner. Although Lirin and Hesina tried to hide the meeting from him, Kal found out and attended, wanting to support his father if he confronted the citylord. As they rode through the city, Kal asked his father why they tried to hide the meeting. Lirin admitted that he wasn’t sure if he even wanted to attend as a part of him just wanted to take the family and flee to Kharbranth or another Alethi town. Lirin confessed that he had tried to leave once, but there was a tie between a man’s heart and his home and he couldn’t bring himself to leave. Having cared for the townspeople for so long, he couldn’t leave them in the hands of Roshone. Once they arrived, the pair were led to a dining room where Roshone was already eating. A servant gestured to a side table set up in a room off the main dining hall, but Lirin sat down at Roshone’s table insisting that he was of second nahn and surely he could have a place at his table. Not wasting any time, Roshone discussed their present situation and asked them to return the spheres, ending their defiance. When Kal responded with an outburst, Lirin sent him away to the kitchens. There, Roshone’s son, Rillir walked in with Laral, and confusing Kaladin for a servant, ordered him to fetch their supper. Kal, protesting that he wasn’t a servant, lost an argument over his calling with Rillir, leaving him humiliated. As Lirin and Kal left the mansion, the latter admitted to his father that he had been considering joining the army. However, he had resolved to becoming a surgeon so that he would have the education to stand up to the lighteyes. During their conversation, Kal saw something unfamiliar in his father’s eyes, guilt. He then realized that Lirin had indeed stolen the spheres from Wistiow, changing everything, but also changing nothing. He resolved to use the spheres for his training, but would eventually pay them back to Laral.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Somebody has to start', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b534474d-0569-4c92-a142-f807167b02ec'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Somebody has to start \n\nWhile on a hunting trip, Roshone and Rillir were seriously injured by a whitespine and brought to Lirin’s surgery room. Kaladin and Lirin determined that Rillir’s injuries were already fatal and tended to Roshone despite his protests.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Somebody has to start', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b534474d-0569-4c92-a142-f807167b02ec'}, page_content='Kaladin - They anesthetized both patients, Roshone for surgery and Rillir for mercy. During the procedure, Lirin hesitated when he discovered a piece of the whitespine’s tusk near Roshone’s femoral artery. Kaladin considered how easy it would be to fake an accident, but they continued on to save Roshone’s life as Rillir died. When Kaladin asked his father why he did not let Roshone die, Lirin answered that they have to be better men than the lighteyes.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'A decision made', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a499bee2-1145-468d-a425-afacb9453003'}, page_content='Kaladin -  A decision made \nIn the Weeping of , Kaladin found himself increasingly hoping for the sun and the wind again, the weather making it difficult for him to get things done. One day, when Kaladin was lying on the roof during the rain after repairing a leak, Tien called up to him, wanting to join him. While Kaladin didn’t think anyone else could cheer him up, he knew Tien could because somehow he just always knew the right thing to do. At first, it was just the two of them sitting in silence. Then, Tien presented Kaladin with a gift, an intricately carved horse that he made at Ral’s shop. Kaladin asked if he showed the beautiful horse to Ral, but Tien confessed that it got him into trouble because it wasn’t useful. Not a bit discouraged, Tien said he would make him proud tomorrow by finishing a chair. Kaladin found himself amazed at his brother’s ability to smile even in the darkest of times, swearing things grew brighter around them in that moment. However, it was short-lived as Kaladin admitted his concerns about their father having to spend the spheres to not only Tien, but also his mother. Hesina promised him that there would be enough spheres for him to go to Kharbranth in two months. Kaladin suggested that perhaps the entire family should come with him, not wanting to leave them behind, especially with Roshone “strangling” them. Hesina informed Kaladin that they only spent the spheres to make Roshone think he was winning, not because they needed to. Once Kaladin left, the spheres would be safe in the hands of the ardents while he studied to become a surgeon. However, Hesina reminded him that that his life was his own and that he didn’t have to become a surgeon to make them proud.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'A decision made', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a499bee2-1145-468d-a425-afacb9453003'}, page_content='Kaladin - They sat for awhile, Kaladin considering her words and what Tien could possibly like about the rain, when Lirin came with news that there was a gathering in the square.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'A decision made', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a499bee2-1145-468d-a425-afacb9453003'}, page_content='Kaladin - Roshone assembled the townsfolk as Meridas Amaram, a general for Highprince Sadeas, had arrived in Hearthstone to recruit soldiers for the army. There, Kaladin and his family were shocked to learn that Laral was now engaged to Roshone himself after Rillir’s death. Meanwhile, since only six men had volunteered, Amaram asked Roshone to announce the list of conscripts. As citylord, Roshone was barred from placing Lirin or Kaladin on the conscription list because they served a vital function to the town. However, Roshone placed Tien’s name on the list instead. When Kaladin tried to take his brother’s place, he was denied because the law gave the choice to Roshone alone. Left with no other option, Kaladin enlisted in the army in order to protect Tien and promised his devastated parents that he would bring Tien back safely in four years. Amaram also promised Lirin that he would make Tien a messenger boy for a while.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "Amaram's Army (1168-1172)", 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3a42a6ff-387c-43d9-8eb8-5dbc01468681'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Amaram's Army (1168-1172) \n Natural talent \nKaladin received his initial training under Tukks, who taught him the importance of controlled passion—to be passionate and to care without losing control of his emotions—a lesson that he did not initially understand. During his training, Kaladin demonstrated a natural aptitude for being a soldier, learning the spear faster than anyone else in his cohort, barely even needing instruction, much to Tukks’ surprise. After freezing on the battle field the first time, Kaladin was assigned cleaning duty by Tukks. Not to punish him, but to help him fit in more."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Amaram's Army (1168-1172)", 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3a42a6ff-387c-43d9-8eb8-5dbc01468681'}, page_content="Kaladin - Tukks explained about how many soldiers struggle with the need to hurt the enemy. However, Kaladin didn't believe he froze because he was afraid to hurt someone, but because he realized he could kill, if needed. Tien's Death \n\nDespite Amaram’s promise to Lirin, the older messenger boys, including Tien, were soon organized into several squads of reserve units to make up for a shortfall in recruitment. Dalar assured Kaladin that these squads would not see combat unless the army was in serious danger."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Amaram's Army (1168-1172)", 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3a42a6ff-387c-43d9-8eb8-5dbc01468681'}, page_content="Kaladin - Less than four months after his enlistment, Kaladin took part in his third real battle. Amaram’s army was attempting to hold a hilltop, but as the battle deteriorated, messenger boys were assigned to Sheler's company. Hearing that the messenger squad was sent to the front, Kaladin ran recklessly through the battlefield in an attempt to reach his brother. On the southeast side of the hill, Squadleader Varth placed Tien and two other boys in the front lines, successfully using them as bait. Kaladin, killing a man for the first time during his run, reached Tien only after he had been killed. Weeping and bleeding from wounds taken during his run, he hugged Tien’s dead body until long past the end of the battle. Stormblessed \nKaladin sent a letter to his parents informing them of Tien’s death and his decision not to return to Hearthstone. He spent the next year driving himself to exhaustion every day on the practice yard, vowing vengeance and never letting another person die because of his lack of skill."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Amaram's Army (1168-1172)", 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3a42a6ff-387c-43d9-8eb8-5dbc01468681'}, page_content="Kaladin - He became the best spearman in his company and was rumored to be the best in the entire army. He eventually met Tarah, the daughter of an assistant quartermaster, who coaxed Kaladin out of his single-mindedness, claiming it would burn him out. The two became romantically involved, but they separated soon after she was transferred to a scribe’s job in Mourn’s Vault. Kaladin blamed himself for their failed relationship, knowing that he’d been stupid not to send responses to her letters. He later joined the Takers under Tukks' leadership. There, Kaladin met Durk, who became a mentor to him. Durk was impressed with Kaladin’s abilities, considering him a natural born soldier, an artist with a spear. Unfortunately, every member of the Takers was eventually killed with Kaladin being the lone survivor. At the age of eighteen, Kaladin was promoted to squadleader, making him the youngest one in the army and became known as Kaladin Stormblessed. Fighting the Shardbearer \nOne year after becoming a Squadleader, in , Kaladin fought his final battle in Amaram’s army. Prior to the battle, Kaladin met with a Squadleader Gare and two of his sergeants. Kaladin bribed Gare to transfer Cenn, a young and inexperienced soldier, to Kaladin’s own squad, whom he entrusted to his sergeant Dallet. He also bribed the surgeons to give priority to his men. While bribing the surgeons, the money pouch stuck to his hand by what Kaladin assumed to be a windspren, although it was actually his first meeting with Sylphrena. After consulting with Dallet, Kaladin went to the front lines to prepare for battle. Once the signal to march was given, Kaladin’s well-disciplined squad used non-standard tactics to avoid taking any casualties. However, the larger battle didn’t go nearly as well. When the larger body of Amaram’s forces broke, Kaladin’s squad was left in the middle of the enemy. During the chaos, Kaladin single-handedly defeated six men to save Cenn, who had been stranded alone without the rest of the squad. After treating Cenn, Kaladin saw an enemy battalionlord and decided to kill him, hoping such a feat would get him transferred to the Shattered Plains, where Kaladin believed the real fight and honorable men can be found. Kaladin and two of his subsquads executed their plan flawlessly, with Kaladin himself landing the killing blow on the enemy battalionlord. Immediately after, an unknown enemy, a full Shardbearer, later revealed to be Helaran Davar, appeared and cut through Amaram’s army, killing Cenn, Dallet, and two more of Kaladin's men. Helaran continued on to attack Amaram, whose honor guard had abandoned him. Enraged, Kaladin and his twenty remaining men chased after Helaran. Helaran killed sixteen of Kaladin’s men before Kaladin finally managed to kill him, saving Amaram’s life. Amaram and Coreb, one of Kaladin's men, urged Kaladin to claim Helaran’s Shards, as it was his right to do so by ancient tradition. However, Kaladin was disgusted by the thought of wielding the same Blade that claimed the lives of so many of his friends. Instead, Kaladin gave the Shards to Coreb and walked away. Betrayal \n\nA few hours later, Kaladin was called to Amaram’s warcenter, where he met Amaram and a group of his men along with the four surviving members of his squad. After a short conversation, Amaram and his men ambushed Kaladin, killing the surviving members of Kaladin’s squad while Kaladin himself was restrained. Amaram apologized but said this was the only way to ensure secrecy. He informed Kaladin that he had thought it over for hours before finally being convinced by Restares that the best interests of Alethkar would served if he wielded the Shards himself. As an act of mercy and gratitude, Amaram spared Kaladin’s life and branded him with the “sas nahn” glyphpair to mark him as a slave to be sold."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Natural talent', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '85300be9-d0dd-47dc-b28a-3d389afcdc66'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Natural talent \nKaladin received his initial training under Tukks, who taught him the importance of controlled passion—to be passionate and to care without losing control of his emotions—a lesson that he did not initially understand. During his training, Kaladin demonstrated a natural aptitude for being a soldier, learning the spear faster than anyone else in his cohort, barely even needing instruction, much to Tukks’ surprise. After freezing on the battle field the first time, Kaladin was assigned cleaning duty by Tukks. Not to punish him, but to help him fit in more.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Natural talent', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '85300be9-d0dd-47dc-b28a-3d389afcdc66'}, page_content="Kaladin - Tukks explained about how many soldiers struggle with the need to hurt the enemy. However, Kaladin didn't believe he froze because he was afraid to hurt someone, but because he realized he could kill, if needed."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Tien's Death", 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3ab14a19-568d-40fb-b9fe-5d968ba181cd'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Tien's Death \n\nDespite Amaram’s promise to Lirin, the older messenger boys, including Tien, were soon organized into several squads of reserve units to make up for a shortfall in recruitment. Dalar assured Kaladin that these squads would not see combat unless the army was in serious danger."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Tien's Death", 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3ab14a19-568d-40fb-b9fe-5d968ba181cd'}, page_content="Kaladin - Less than four months after his enlistment, Kaladin took part in his third real battle. Amaram’s army was attempting to hold a hilltop, but as the battle deteriorated, messenger boys were assigned to Sheler's company. Hearing that the messenger squad was sent to the front, Kaladin ran recklessly through the battlefield in an attempt to reach his brother. On the southeast side of the hill, Squadleader Varth placed Tien and two other boys in the front lines, successfully using them as bait. Kaladin, killing a man for the first time during his run, reached Tien only after he had been killed. Weeping and bleeding from wounds taken during his run, he hugged Tien’s dead body until long past the end of the battle."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Stormblessed', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'aaba0fc2-1b2b-476c-969b-647ee61ab955'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Stormblessed \nKaladin sent a letter to his parents informing them of Tien’s death and his decision not to return to Hearthstone. He spent the next year driving himself to exhaustion every day on the practice yard, vowing vengeance and never letting another person die because of his lack of skill.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Stormblessed', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'aaba0fc2-1b2b-476c-969b-647ee61ab955'}, page_content="Kaladin - He became the best spearman in his company and was rumored to be the best in the entire army. He eventually met Tarah, the daughter of an assistant quartermaster, who coaxed Kaladin out of his single-mindedness, claiming it would burn him out. The two became romantically involved, but they separated soon after she was transferred to a scribe’s job in Mourn’s Vault. Kaladin blamed himself for their failed relationship, knowing that he’d been stupid not to send responses to her letters. He later joined the Takers under Tukks' leadership. There, Kaladin met Durk, who became a mentor to him. Durk was impressed with Kaladin’s abilities, considering him a natural born soldier, an artist with a spear. Unfortunately, every member of the Takers was eventually killed with Kaladin being the lone survivor. At the age of eighteen, Kaladin was promoted to squadleader, making him the youngest one in the army and became known as Kaladin Stormblessed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Fighting the Shardbearer', 'order': 22, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '47465a54-8381-490f-88a5-eb6101fb40b4'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Fighting the Shardbearer \nOne year after becoming a Squadleader, in , Kaladin fought his final battle in Amaram’s army. Prior to the battle, Kaladin met with a Squadleader Gare and two of his sergeants. Kaladin bribed Gare to transfer Cenn, a young and inexperienced soldier, to Kaladin’s own squad, whom he entrusted to his sergeant Dallet. He also bribed the surgeons to give priority to his men. While bribing the surgeons, the money pouch stuck to his hand by what Kaladin assumed to be a windspren, although it was actually his first meeting with Sylphrena. After consulting with Dallet, Kaladin went to the front lines to prepare for battle.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Fighting the Shardbearer', 'order': 22, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '47465a54-8381-490f-88a5-eb6101fb40b4'}, page_content="Kaladin - Once the signal to march was given, Kaladin’s well-disciplined squad used non-standard tactics to avoid taking any casualties. However, the larger battle didn’t go nearly as well. When the larger body of Amaram’s forces broke, Kaladin’s squad was left in the middle of the enemy. During the chaos, Kaladin single-handedly defeated six men to save Cenn, who had been stranded alone without the rest of the squad. After treating Cenn, Kaladin saw an enemy battalionlord and decided to kill him, hoping such a feat would get him transferred to the Shattered Plains, where Kaladin believed the real fight and honorable men can be found. Kaladin and two of his subsquads executed their plan flawlessly, with Kaladin himself landing the killing blow on the enemy battalionlord. Immediately after, an unknown enemy, a full Shardbearer, later revealed to be Helaran Davar, appeared and cut through Amaram’s army, killing Cenn, Dallet, and two more of Kaladin's men. Helaran continued on to attack Amaram, whose honor guard had abandoned him. Enraged, Kaladin and his twenty remaining men chased after Helaran. Helaran killed sixteen of Kaladin’s men before Kaladin finally managed to kill him, saving Amaram’s life. Amaram and Coreb, one of Kaladin's men, urged Kaladin to claim Helaran’s Shards, as it was his right to do so by ancient tradition. However, Kaladin was disgusted by the thought of wielding the same Blade that claimed the lives of so many of his friends. Instead, Kaladin gave the Shards to Coreb and walked away."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Betrayal', 'order': 23, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28caf0bc-f75e-44ee-bcec-2f23e894491a'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Betrayal \n\nA few hours later, Kaladin was called to Amaram’s warcenter, where he met Amaram and a group of his men along with the four surviving members of his squad. After a short conversation, Amaram and his men ambushed Kaladin, killing the surviving members of Kaladin’s squad while Kaladin himself was restrained.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Betrayal', 'order': 23, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28caf0bc-f75e-44ee-bcec-2f23e894491a'}, page_content='Kaladin - Amaram apologized but said this was the only way to ensure secrecy. He informed Kaladin that he had thought it over for hours before finally being convinced by Restares that the best interests of Alethkar would served if he wielded the Shards himself. As an act of mercy and gratitude, Amaram spared Kaladin’s life and branded him with the “sas nahn” glyphpair to mark him as a slave to be sold.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Slavery (1172-1173)', 'order': 24, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '951061ab-1809-4bb1-a7ae-50dc10aabd54'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Slavery (1172-1173) \n Defiance \nKaladin spent the next eight months under at least six different slavemasters, including a man named Katarotam, suffering from constant and squalid conditions. Initially, Kaladin was defiant, making ten escape attempts. Although several of them were successful, he always ended up getting re-captured. In his tenth escape attempt, he led a group of twenty armed slaves, including a man named Goshel. However, they all died, leaving Kaladin to believe he failed them. By the eighth month, Kaladin fell into despair and stopped making any escape attempts. Though he should have been killed for his tenth escape attempt, Kaladin’s master found him “intriguing,” and branded his forehead with the shash glyph, meaning “dangerous”, and sold him. Eventually, Kaladin was bought by Tvlakv and it was during this time that Kaladin hit his lowest point. He found and hid away some poisonous blackbane leaves, unsure of whether or not he wanted to use them to commit suicide, kill his master, or something else. Regardless, he took comfort in having options open to him. However, when a fellow slave took ill, Kaladin’s instinct to protect and heal re-emerged and Kaladin attempted to save his life. His attempts failed as Tvlakv had the slave killed in order to avoid the infection spreading. Sylphrena \nIt was during this time that Kaladin first noticed Sylphrena. Though she’d been following him for several months, Kaladin believed her to be nothing more than the average, albeit mischievous windspren. As Kaladin was rubbing the blackbane leaves between his fingers, Syl asked him what he had. At first, he ignored her, but not without noticing some oddities about her, such as the exceptionally long period of time that she had been following him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Slavery (1172-1173)', 'order': 24, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '951061ab-1809-4bb1-a7ae-50dc10aabd54'}, page_content='Kaladin - When she called him by name, he was shocked as he didn’t believe that spren could use people’s names. To his knowledge, spren could mimic voices or expressions, but they didn’t have actual intelligence or memory. Kaladin thought he was insane at first, but he eventually started to converse with Syl. During the course of their first conversation, Syl asked Kaladin why he didn’t fight like he used to. Kaladin continued to question how she knew both his name and what he did weeks ago. He finally confessed to her that he had failed, remembering the deaths of Tien, Cenn, Dallet, Tukks, and the Takers. After the slave took ill and Tvlakv had him killed, Syl asked Kaladin why he didn’t cry. Kaladin replied that it wouldn’t change anything and maybe she should ask the Almighty why men cry. During a storm, Syl chased after it, but eventually returned. Kaladin wondered why she didn’t go with the other windspren, but she told him she liked it there with him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Slavery (1172-1173)', 'order': 24, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '951061ab-1809-4bb1-a7ae-50dc10aabd54'}, page_content='Kaladin - Finding the way after all \nDays passed and the wagons continued to roll on until one particular day when they didn’t stop at their usual time, leaving Kaladin to wonder why they hadn’t stopped for their afternoon slop. Well past noon, they finally rolled to a stop and Bluth and Tag joined Tvlakv. The three quickly started arguing as they held up a piece of paper. Kaladin called out, asking Tvlakv if he was lost and offered that perhaps he should seek guidance from the Almighty who had a “fondness” for slavers. Tvlakv walked over and asked Kaladin if he knew anything of the area. Kaladin requested the map and without even reading it, he ripped it into pieces, much to Tvlakv’s horror. Tvlakv called for the mercenaries, but both Bluth and Tag declined to intervene. Realizing that Kaladin was probably invaluable at that point, Tvlakv asked what the former wanted in exchange for guiding the caravan. Kaladin suggested a cliff, not for a vantage point as Tvlakv assumed, but one to throw the slaver off of. Annoyed, Tvlakv told Kaladin it was good that he was fueled by hatred because it would make him strong, but cautioned that it could keep him from getting vengeance. Kaladin countered, saying he didn’t want vengeance as he learned a long time ago it didn’t work. Tvlakv argued that Kaladin was young still and that he could escape his fate and hunt down the man who sold him into slavery, Highlord Amaram. Shocked, Kaladin asked how Tvlakv knew about Amaram, but the slaver just said men talk. Though Tvlakv knew the truth about Kaladin’s brands, he told the younger man that they both had to play the game for now to avoid an even worse fate. However, they were at crossroads because Kaladin had left the map in shreds. Kaladin admitted he had never been this way so he didn’t know where to go. As Tvlakv walked away, Kaladin cursed, realizing he almost found himself liking the slaver. The wagons continued to roll on after their exchange, even through highstorms. Well before the end of one of them, Bluth lowered the sides of the wagon, allowing the rain to soak the slaves. Kaladin argued that it was too early to be taking down the sides, but Bluth stated that Tvlakv wanted them clean today. Realizing they were probably nearing their destination, Kaladin scanned the landscape wondering where they were going.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Slavery (1172-1173)', 'order': 24, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '951061ab-1809-4bb1-a7ae-50dc10aabd54'}, page_content='Kaladin - Syl returned to tell Kaladin there were many others like him nearby. As she pointed eastward, Kaladin was shocked to see the enormous army encampment he’d heard stories about, the place Tien wanted to go in the end, the army he spent years trying to get into - The Shattered Plains.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Defiance', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '84fb72f7-0244-4f97-89c6-595136078d95'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Defiance \nKaladin spent the next eight months under at least six different slavemasters, including a man named Katarotam, suffering from constant and squalid conditions. Initially, Kaladin was defiant, making ten escape attempts. Although several of them were successful, he always ended up getting re-captured. In his tenth escape attempt, he led a group of twenty armed slaves, including a man named Goshel. However, they all died, leaving Kaladin to believe he failed them. By the eighth month, Kaladin fell into despair and stopped making any escape attempts. Though he should have been killed for his tenth escape attempt, Kaladin’s master found him “intriguing,” and branded his forehead with the shash glyph, meaning “dangerous”, and sold him. Eventually, Kaladin was bought by Tvlakv and it was during this time that Kaladin hit his lowest point. He found and hid away some poisonous blackbane leaves, unsure of whether or not he wanted to use them to commit suicide, kill his master, or something else. Regardless, he took comfort in having options open to him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Defiance', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '84fb72f7-0244-4f97-89c6-595136078d95'}, page_content='Kaladin - However, when a fellow slave took ill, Kaladin’s instinct to protect and heal re-emerged and Kaladin attempted to save his life. His attempts failed as Tvlakv had the slave killed in order to avoid the infection spreading.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sylphrena', 'order': 26, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ee6fb168-3262-4970-8b75-27276172a47e'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Sylphrena \nIt was during this time that Kaladin first noticed Sylphrena. Though she’d been following him for several months, Kaladin believed her to be nothing more than the average, albeit mischievous windspren. As Kaladin was rubbing the blackbane leaves between his fingers, Syl asked him what he had. At first, he ignored her, but not without noticing some oddities about her, such as the exceptionally long period of time that she had been following him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sylphrena', 'order': 26, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ee6fb168-3262-4970-8b75-27276172a47e'}, page_content='Kaladin - When she called him by name, he was shocked as he didn’t believe that spren could use people’s names. To his knowledge, spren could mimic voices or expressions, but they didn’t have actual intelligence or memory. Kaladin thought he was insane at first, but he eventually started to converse with Syl. During the course of their first conversation, Syl asked Kaladin why he didn’t fight like he used to. Kaladin continued to question how she knew both his name and what he did weeks ago. He finally confessed to her that he had failed, remembering the deaths of Tien, Cenn, Dallet, Tukks, and the Takers. After the slave took ill and Tvlakv had him killed, Syl asked Kaladin why he didn’t cry. Kaladin replied that it wouldn’t change anything and maybe she should ask the Almighty why men cry. During a storm, Syl chased after it, but eventually returned. Kaladin wondered why she didn’t go with the other windspren, but she told him she liked it there with him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Finding the way after all', 'order': 27, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d72e509-b4be-410f-a7ef-ca67a1a89fdc'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Finding the way after all \nDays passed and the wagons continued to roll on until one particular day when they didn’t stop at their usual time, leaving Kaladin to wonder why they hadn’t stopped for their afternoon slop. Well past noon, they finally rolled to a stop and Bluth and Tag joined Tvlakv. The three quickly started arguing as they held up a piece of paper. Kaladin called out, asking Tvlakv if he was lost and offered that perhaps he should seek guidance from the Almighty who had a “fondness” for slavers. Tvlakv walked over and asked Kaladin if he knew anything of the area. Kaladin requested the map and without even reading it, he ripped it into pieces, much to Tvlakv’s horror. Tvlakv called for the mercenaries, but both Bluth and Tag declined to intervene. Realizing that Kaladin was probably invaluable at that point, Tvlakv asked what the former wanted in exchange for guiding the caravan. Kaladin suggested a cliff, not for a vantage point as Tvlakv assumed, but one to throw the slaver off of. Annoyed, Tvlakv told Kaladin it was good that he was fueled by hatred because it would make him strong, but cautioned that it could keep him from getting vengeance. Kaladin countered, saying he didn’t want vengeance as he learned a long time ago it didn’t work. Tvlakv argued that Kaladin was young still and that he could escape his fate and hunt down the man who sold him into slavery, Highlord Amaram. Shocked, Kaladin asked how Tvlakv knew about Amaram, but the slaver just said men talk. Though Tvlakv knew the truth about Kaladin’s brands, he told the younger man that they both had to play the game for now to avoid an even worse fate. However, they were at crossroads because Kaladin had left the map in shreds. Kaladin admitted he had never been this way so he didn’t know where to go. As Tvlakv walked away, Kaladin cursed, realizing he almost found himself liking the slaver. The wagons continued to roll on after their exchange, even through highstorms. Well before the end of one of them, Bluth lowered the sides of the wagon, allowing the rain to soak the slaves. Kaladin argued that it was too early to be taking down the sides, but Bluth stated that Tvlakv wanted them clean today.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Finding the way after all', 'order': 27, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d72e509-b4be-410f-a7ef-ca67a1a89fdc'}, page_content='Kaladin - Realizing they were probably nearing their destination, Kaladin scanned the landscape wondering where they were going.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Finding the way after all', 'order': 27, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d72e509-b4be-410f-a7ef-ca67a1a89fdc'}, page_content='Kaladin - Syl returned to tell Kaladin there were many others like him nearby. As she pointed eastward, Kaladin was shocked to see the enormous army encampment he’d heard stories about, the place Tien wanted to go in the end, the army he spent years trying to get into - The Shattered Plains.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Bridgeman (1173) \n Bridge Four \nIn , Tvlakv sold Kaladin and the other slaves to Hashal, the wife of the lighteyed officer who was in charge of the slaves in Highprince Sadeas\'s army. She was not impressed with the slaves, but Kaladin stood out as he was still far more muscled than the others. When asked, Kaladin confirmed he used to be a spearman in Amaram\'s army. After inspecting his brands, and remarking that a "shash" glyph meant death, Hashal asked how he got here. Kaladin responded that he killed someone while drunk, and spoke of his talents with a spear and asked her to give him a chance to fight again in her brightlord’s army. However, Tvlakv told Hashal not to listen to him as he was a deserter, and could not be trusted as he had led rebellions before. Any slaves he might have had corrupted were assigned to be bridgemen while Kaladin was assigned specifically to Bridge Four, the bridge crew with the worst reputation and casualty rate. Kaladin was placed under the command of the bridge sergeant Gaz and was immediately forced to go on a bridge run completely unprepared and unequipped. Bridge Four was sent to carry a large bridge, allowing Sadeas\' soldiers to cross the plateaus of the Shattered Plains and assault the Parshendi. Gaz ran beside Bridge Four, calling out commands during the run due to their most recent bridgeleader having tossed himself down the Honor Chasm. He sent Kaladin to the open slot at the tail of the bridge. Without a vest, the wooden supports dug into Kaladin’s skin causing his shoulders to bleed. As they ran, a nearby bridgeman offered Kaladin advice. Eventually, Gaz called them to a stop and they lifted the bridge into place, allowing the army to pass. They repeated this process, with Kaladin eventually asking why they weren’t turning around. One of the other bridgemen just chuckled and told him they weren’t there yet and to be glad they weren’t. After more than a dozen times, Gaz ordered Kaladin to the front for the final push, declaring that newcomers get to go first. Kaladin quickly realized why arriving was the worst part. The Parshendi volleys launched, killing the men around Kaladin. They eventually got the bridge dropped, but at the expense of the bridgemen, resulting in many casualties. Kaladin just collapsed, knowing he should move or at least bind his wounds, but he just couldn’t, falling unconscious instead. Kaladin was about to be left for dead by the retreating bridge crews, until Syl called out his name and urged him to move. He forced himself to his feet and asked the windspren if she had a name. As he limped through the casualties, he found the body of the leathery faced man who had been nice to him. He harvested his vest and shoes, tying them on as the windspren introduced herself as Sylphrena. Honor Chasm \n\nOver next few weeks, Kaladin grew more and more depressed. Of the twenty-five men who had survived his first bridge deployment, twenty-three had died leaving only Kaladin and one other man. Bridge Four continued to be replenished, with many of those men dying to only to be replaced. They went through countless bridgeleaders, which typically was a favored position on a bridge crew, always getting to run in the best places. However, in Bridge Four, that didn’t matter. Kaladin didn’t bother to learn the names of the bridgemen as it just seemed pointless. One day, as they were working in the lumberyard, new recruits were brought in to be assigned to the bridge crews. Kaladin looked up and a young boy barely fourteen or fifteen caught his eye, reminding him of Tien. He had the same frightened eyes which immediately made Kaladin’s protective instinct kick in.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - However, all he could think of was how everyone he’d tried to protect ended up dead. Syl, unable to bear seeing Kaladin in such a hopeless state, decided to leave, afraid of what would happen to her if she stayed. On the next bridge run, the youth and the last man that survived Kaladin’s initial bridge run died, leaving Kaladin the senior member of Bridge Four. Faced with losing Syl, his only friend, and his inability to protect the boy, Kaladin seriously contemplated suicide. That night, he went to the Honor Chasm, intending to jump off. Before Kaladin could step off the ledge, Syl returned, excitedly carrying a leaf of blackbane with her. Syl, in her naivety, having seen Kaladin previously take heart in having the poisonous leaves with him, assumed they would make Kaladin feel better. Syl recalled how everything seemed to go wrong when he lost the leaves, how he used to fight and make his soldiers feel like family. She admitted that was one of the things that drew her to him to begin with. Kaladin just lamented that he failed, that everything he touches withers and dies. Syl pleaded with him to give it one more try, reminding him that he couldn’t hurt the bridgemen any worse.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - Opening his eyes, he left the chasm and resolved himself to become bridgeleader.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - He marched up to Gaz and seized the man by the throat, sweeping his legs out from under him. Kaladin then intimidated and bribed the man into giving him the position along with the autonomy to run Bridge Four. Entering Bridge Four’s barrack that night, Kaladin found the men all huddled inside just as he left them. Kaladin visited with each man, introducing himself as bridgeleader and learning each of their names. Later, Kaladin went to sleep with a sense of purpose in protecting the men. Reforming Bridge Four \nThe next morning, Kaladin resolved to make some changes in Bridge Four. The first of these included training early in the mornings, putting an end to the group’s sleeping in. When Moash protested, Kaladin punched him in the gut and threw him over his shoulder, taking him outside. The others, shocked and not wanting to suffer the same fate, filed out into the sunlight. As Kaladin outlined his plan, he was immediately met with resistance from his fellow bridgemen who felt chores and bridge runs were more than enough to build their endurance. Kaladin argued that his primary duty was to keep them alive and since he couldn’t do anything about Parshendi arrows, he had to make them stronger. Moash called over to Gaz and asked if they had to listen to Kaladin to which Gaz replied that the bridgeleader only had authority on the field. Moash looked back to Kaladin and told him to storm off, causing the rest of the men to leave as well. Kaladin, undeterred by the men’s resistance, went off to the lumberyard to train by himself. He eventually attracted a crowd that included Teft, Rock, Dunny, and some of the other members of Bridge Four. Before the next bridge run, Kaladin visited an apothecary to purchase some supplies so he could tend to the wounded. However, he quickly discovered that antiseptic was expensive, despite knobweed reeds growing just outside of camp. Kaladin settled on a needle and gut as well as some bandages, spending the four marks he had left from paying Gaz off. Returning to camp just as the bells sounded, Kaladin yelled for the men to line up for the next bridge run. As the men neared the Parshendi lines, Kaladin demanded to switch with Rock, taking the most dangerous center-front spot of the bridge for himself, a rarity for a bridgeleader. During the assault, Kaladin was adamant on rescuing the six who fell. He dragged Hobber and Dabbid to safety with the help of Rock. As he turned to go back out to the field, Teft and Rock stopped him, going back to check on the other three. They returned with Leyten, the only other survivor. Kaladin quickly started to work, providing medical care to the wounded men. After the long battle, they returned to camp with their three wounded in tow much to Gaz’s protests. Because bridgemen were supposed to be expendable, Kaladin was told that he could keep tending to the wounded men, but they would not be paid or fed while they were unable to work. Not wanting to give in to Brightlord Sadeas, the bridgeleader asked other members of Bridge Four to pitch in money and food to care for the men. However, all refused except for Rock.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content="Kaladin - He offered to share his food with Hobber, who was the least injured of the three. Knowing it would only be a matter of time before the rotspren were attracted to the wounded, Kaladin came up with the idea of collecting knobweed stems during stone-gathering detail. With the stems, he could create the antiseptic the men desperately needed and even sell some to get more supplies and food. Gaining the trust of Rock and Teft, Kaladin enlisted their help to find and collect the knobweed during their new detail. Syl assisted as well, finding patches of knobweed and guiding Rock—who was mysteriously able to see her—to them. While working to extract the sap that night, Kaladin started building camaraderie with the two men, even managing to get Rock to open up and share some of his life story. Kaladin returned to the apothecary and made a deal for his bridge crew to gather knobweed sap in return for a skymark per bottle of sap and some bandages. Upon returning from selling the sap, Gaz sent Bridge Four to do chasm duty, recovering valuables from the war dead who had fallen into the chasms. In the chasms, Kaladin continued to build rapport with the men, bringing Dunny into the fold, who sang for the men while others hovered behind. Through their work, Kaladin came across a spear in the chasms. Picking it up and holding it drew the ire of Moash, Sigzil, and Earless Jaks, who began taunting the bridgeleader. Ignoring their gibes, Kaladin closed his eyes and went into a trance. He performed an advanced practice kata with the spear, revealing his talent as a genius spearman to the men, leaving them speechless. This particular sequence would years later become known as the Chasm Kata. During the display, Teft, along with some of the other men, noticed an unknown spren—actually Syl—zipping around Kaladin. Through the rest of their chasm duty and on the walk back, more men started to open up. The night culminated in Kaladin using the money he had earned to purchase food and assigning Rock to cook a stew. Not a single person refused to partake in eating around the fire. The next day, a majority of the men followed his orders to rise out of bed and practice. Side Carry \nKaladin managed to get all the men to submit to his authority and participate in training. The training cut down on their losses, but Kaladin was still unsatisfied. Realizing that the bridge itself could act as a shield, Kaladin started training the men to shift the bridge and carry it on its side. The practice was slow going, which left Gaz pleased at the prospect of Bridge Four losing more members. Prior to the next bridge run, Kaladin gained Lopen as a member from a new batch of recruits. They were immediately sent the next run. Realizing it was going to be a difficult approach, Kaladin ordered Bridge Four to perform the side carry as they engaged the Parshendi. The side carry was a success as it completely protected Kaladin’s men. However, other bridge crews tried to emulate the side carry. Not having trained in the maneuver, the other bridge crews failed. Lacking a sufficient number of bridges to cross the chasms and with the timing of the assault desynchronized, the battle was thrown into chaos and  Sadeas lost. Understanding that he’d undermined the army’s strategy, Kaladin ordered Rock and Teft to stand down and Kaladin stepped up to Gaz and Lamaril to accept his fate. The Stormfather's Judgement\n\nAs punishment for the failure, Highprince Sadeas demoted several officers and executed Lamaril, the lighteyed officer directly in charge of the bridgemen. Sadeas declined to execute Kaladin directly, but instead decided to let the Stormfather judge him. Kaladin would be freed if he could survive being tied to the side of Bridge Four’s barrack during the highstorm. Prior to the highstorm, Rock, Teft, and Moash came to see Kaladin and promised they would remember him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin asked them to tell the men to come out after the storm and they will see that he had survived. Teft gave Kaladin a dun sphere for good luck and the men retreated into the barracks as the storm approached. As the storm raged and slammed into Kaladin, Syl told him to grab the roof and then the ring that his rope was attached to. He did as she said knowing that if he let go, he’d be dangling in the air again.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - However, the rain numbed his fingers and caused him to slip, flapping in the air again.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - As he hit the roof, everything went black and silent. During the darkness, Kaladin met the Stormfather in the form of a large, inhuman face. Immediately after, Kaladin’s Surgebinding abilities manifested and he drew upon Stormlight from the glowing blue sphere before falling unconscious. Kaladin Stormblessed \nAfter the highstorm, the bridgemen followed Rock and Teft to go check on Kaladin. The bridgeleader hung by his ankles, his skin sliced in a hundred places. Just as the men gathered around him horrified, Kaladin’s eyes snapped open. His hand dropped the sphere that had been given to him, now dun, shocking Teft who knew the sphere should be infused. Wanting answers, he told Kaladin he better survive and the men rushed to cut him down. They cared for him and posted a constant guard by his bed. His injuries were severe, even attracting Deathspren. While recovering, Teft brought three infused spheres telling Kaladin he couldn’t leave them. He watched as Kaladin unconsciously consumed the Stormlight, causing Teft to suspect he may be a member of the Knights Radiant. Ten days later, Kaladin made a miraculous recovery and his men, never having known of his previous army service, revived the name Kaladin Stormblessed. Transforming Bridge Four into spearmen \nAfter his recovery, Kaladin accompanied Bridge Four on their next bridge run. Once they dropped the bridge, Kaladin watched the battle raging on the next plateau alongside Rock and Sigzil. The latter asked why the bridgemen weren’t allowed to use shields during runs. Rock suggested that shields would slow them down, but Kaladin realized it was because they were bait. Kaladin slipped into despair as he realized there was no hope for his men. Things were compounded the next day when Kaladin met Matal, their new commander, and was re-acquainted with his wife, Hashal. She informed Kaladin that her husband would not run the bridge crews with the same laxness as his predecessor. Hashal then permanently assigned Bridge Four to chasm duty. Given the new orders and knowing their place as bait, Kaladin realized that further training as bridgemen would be a futile endeavor. Instead, he proposed training the men to become spearmen in order to escape, which his men accepted. During a highstorm, Kaladin dreamed he was the storm, traveling east to west, seeing the ground from the perspective of the storm itself. He passed over the Shattered Plains, the Sea of Spears, Kholinar, the Horneater Peaks, and countless other cities and villages. His path crossed Szeth’s in the middle of an assassination. Finally, he met the Stormfather once again, who left him with a cryptic message regarding the Oathpact being shattered and Odium reigning. Kaladin gasped awake to find himself being restrained. He attacked his “assailants,” but quickly realized they were just members of Bridge Four. They told him he had been in a fever dream and that he tried to walk out into the highstorm. Shaking off his vision, Kaladin went to clean up, even letting Rock give him a shave. Later that day, Bridge Four was given a new recruit, a parshman that Kaladin named Shen. Kaladin found himself walking around Sadeas’ warcamp an hour later, still worried about his dream. He asked Syl if she knew anything about Odium, which caused her to hiss and flee immediately to a nearby building. Before he could ask why the word set her off, Kaladin heard a series of curses behind him. Turning, Kaladin witnessed Adolin Kholin saving a prostitute from being beaten by a lighteyed officer. Choosing to escort the prostitute to the border, Adolin threw an emerald chip to Kaladin and told him to deliver a message that he couldn’t make his meeting and would reschedule. Kaladin took the money, but didn’t deliver the message due to his disdain of Adolin’s attitude and lighteyes in general. Syl returned, but was distressed at Kaladin’s increasingly dark attitude concerning lighteyes and his breach of the implicit agreement to do as Adolin asked. During their chasm duty detail, Kaladin secretly began training Bridge Four, which had now dwindled to twenty-four members, as spearmen. To assist with the training, Kaladin tricked Teft into revealing that he had been a soldier and appointed him to oversee the men. To maintain their cover of working in the chasms, he assigned Lopen, Rock, Dabbid, and Shen to do the actual salvage work with Syl’s assistance.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin was impressed at the men’s progress after only a few hours and remarked that thanks to their adverse conditions, they were ironically the most motivated and fit recruits he had ever seen. In one of the next bridge runs, Dunny was killed. Frustrated, Kaladin began rescuing members from other bridge crews, commanding his men to carry them back to the barracks despite barely having enough resources to care for his own men. Kaladin’s actions coupled with the fact that the arrows seemed to dodge him when he ran point further raised Teft’s suspicions about the bridgeleader being a Knight Radiant. During chasm duty a week after Dunny’s passing, Bridge Four found slightly more than an emerald broam’s worth of money, including an actual emerald broam. With the money, they realized they could not only feed and care for the wounded bridgemen, but they could also advance their escape plan. Kaladin decided to turn over the emerald broam—an amount of money that no bridgeman could ever safely spend—but kept the rest. Rock, though an avowed pacifist, took up a bow and attached the pouch to the underside of one of the permanent bridges using an arrow. Lopen covertly retrieved the money during their next bridge runs and turned the money over to Kaladin. Discovery of Surgebinding powers\n\nIn one of the next runs, Bridge Four dropped to just twenty-six members when both Maps and Arik died. Kaladin struggled to deal with their deaths, worried that soon he’d be the only one left.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content="Kaladin - The rest of Bridge Four also appeared anxious as they fell in with their bridgeleader. Returning to camp, Kaladin dismissed the men, who in turn gave him a salute that Teft taught them. Teft lingered, allowing the bridgeleader to look at his arm. Under the ruse, Teft punched Kaladin, forcing him to unconsciously use his powers to defend himself. Kaladin demanded to know what Teft was doing, who just replied that he was testing something. Before either man could discuss it further, Lopen pointed out that Kaladin was glowing. Grabbing Teft, Kaladin demanded to know what he’d done to him. Teft denied doing anything, pointing out that Kaladin had been feeding off Stormlight since he’d been sick. Seeing Syl out of the corner of his eye, Kaladin confronted the spren about his powers. Realizing they come from the Knights Radiant, Kaladin grew scared and wanted to be rid of them. Syl questioned why he’d want to be rid of something of the Windrunners. Kaladin wondered if he was cursed, which caused Syl to run away. When Lopen and Teft found him, Kaladin fled, overwhelmed at his new discovery. That night, Kaladin came across Hoid, who told him the story of Derethil and the Wandersail, a story that Kaladin interpreted as one about taking responsibility. Before Hoid left, he gave Kaladin a Trailman's flute and charged him with looking after his apprentice, Sigzil, who he now graduated to a full Worldsinger. Syl, who was present for the story, returned to Kaladin and explained she was behind what was happening to him. Syl offered to cut off their bond, but it would leave them both crippled. However, Kaladin decided to accept the responsibility that Surgebinding represented and use the power to help others. Kaladin spent the next week trying to learn how to use his Surgebinding powers with Teft’s help with little to no success while Bridge Four continued to train under Rock’s leadership. While trying to learn Surgebinding, Teft told Kaladin what he knew of the Knights Radiant, teaching him the First Ideal of the Immortal Words. Their training was interrupted when Hashal came to visit. She informed Kaladin that Bridge Four would now go on every bridge run, citing they were a “model” for the other crews. They would no longer get the normal break between runs, a further reprisal for the side carry incident, and would now do chasm duty at night. Responding to the increased danger this change brought, Kaladin came up with a plan to use the skins of dead Parshendi found in the chasms as armor. In order to bring the armor out of the chasms, Kaladin successfully managed to use his powers to run up a wall and attach the armor to the underside of the permanent bridge they originally used to hide the spheres. During one of the next bridge runs, Kaladin donned the carapace armor and ran ahead of the bridge crews, drawing the attention of the Parshendi. The desecration of a Parshendi corpse enraged the warriors who focused all of their efforts on Kaladin, ignoring everyone else on the battlefield. Drawing in Stormlight, Kaladin dodged arrows, his muscles reacting quickly. As Bridge Four came into range, an arrow cut open Kaladin’s arm, but to his surprise, it began to seal up instead of bleed. Continuing to serve as a distraction, Kaladin’s Surgebinding abilities protected him and the bridge crews from any harm, marking his plan a resounding success. While Bridge Four was resting and watching Kaladin treat a Thaylen man, a group of Parshendi soldiers attempted to ambush them. However, Dalinar Kholin came to their rescue and saluted them as he left. Given the success of the carapace armor, Matal gave Kaladin permission to outfit all of Bridge Four in the armor, with his wife Hashal claiming it was her idea the entire time. He set Leyten, an apprentice armorer, to work on making the sets of carapace armor with the help of the wounded men. Meanwhile, the spearmen’s training advanced rapidly, with Moash and Skar emerging as the most skilled. Battle of the Tower \nTen days later, on , Bridge Four participated in the Battle of the Tower, where the combined armies of Highprinces Sadeas and Dalinar assaulted the Tower. By this time, they had not only perfected using the carapace armor and large wooden shields, but they had made enough sets to outfit the entire unit."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin led the charge, staying in front of the other decoys, trying to distract the Parshendi forces as best he could. However, his efforts weren’t as successful as the first time he donned the armor.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - Five bridge crews dropped, slaughtered right where they ran.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - While Bridge Four fared better, they didn’t arrive unscathed. Skar and Teft both suffered injuries, which Kaladin tended to once they reached the Tower. Once Kaladin finished, he surveyed the battlefield and to his surprise, Sadeas was retreating. At first, he thought something must be wrong, but then he quickly realized that Sadeas had set up a trap, abandoning Dalinar and his men on the Tower with no means of escape. Bridge Four retreated with the rest of Sadeas’ army, lagging behind so they could carry their wounded. As Kaladin carried the bridge, he had the idea of using the battle to escape, allowing the army to think that his men had been killed. Once Matal agreed to leave them behind, Kaladin explained the details of the escape to the men and offered to stay behind with the wounded men. Bridge Four protested, but Kaladin commanded them to stick to the plan. However, there was more than just the wounded men plaguing him. Looking back to the Tower, he watched as Dalinar and his men continued fighting. The men of Bridge Four asked if there was anything they could do, but Kaladin refused, claiming it would be suicide. Syl, who had taken up the form of a full-sized person, spoke up and revealed that she remembered being an honorspren, a spirit of oaths, promises, and nobility. After a moment of internal conflict, Kaladin ordered his men to turn around and head back towards Dalinar’s army. Kaladin led Bridge Four as they charged the plateau in hopes of giving Dalinar’s army a chance to escape. He was filled with one purpose only and that was to protect.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridgeman (1173)', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be92b5b5-4dfd-4e4e-bcd7-3974f347e948'}, page_content='Kaladin - He ran ahead, dodging arrows, but he quickly realized something was wrong. Syl drew his attention back to Bridge Four and the many arrows pointed at their unshielded flank. He ordered them to go into the side carry position to deflect the arrows, something they hadn’t done in weeks. Reaching his crew, he turned just in time to see more archers behind them drawing for a large volley. He screamed and threw every bit of Stormlight he could into his shield, pulling over a hundred arrows into it. Seeing what Kaladin had done, both groups of Parshendi that had released volleys turned and fled. Knowing that Kaladin was in no condition to run the bridge, Moash led the rest of the men onwards to help Dalinar. Kaladin crawled to the edge of the chasm and asked Syl if she could help make him stronger, but she shook her head. As he listened to the sounds of war and death around him, he was transported back to the most horrible of days, the day Tien died. When he snapped out of his trance, Syl asked him if he knew the Words. Wanting to save his men, Kaladin took up a spear and spoke the Second Ideal of the Windrunners, progressing his path to becoming a member of the Knights Radiant. Kaladin fought with amazing prowess, his natural talents enhanced to unnatural levels by Stormlight. He single-handedly engaged and defeated dozens of Parshendi. Kaladin and his men held the bridge until Dalinar’s soldiers were able to fight their way to them. During the brief respite, the bridgeleader checked on his men, learning they had suffered three casualties and several injuries. Kaladin organized the retreat, putting Teft in charge of the bridgemen and keeping Moash by his side. Upon closer inspection of the Alethi soldiers, Kaladin realized that neither Highprince Dalinar nor Adolin were with them. Heading back to the front lines, Kaladin found the Cobalt Guard, the group sworn to protect Adolin, still fighting. Knowing they wouldn’t leave without their highprince, Kaladin searched for Adolin and ordered him to retreat. However, Adolin refused to leave without his father. Kaladin convinced him to go with Moash while he went to retrieve Dalinar. He leapt over the chasm to where Dalinar was fighting with Eshonai, both of whom were utilizing a full set of Shards. Fighting a Shardbearer for a second time, Kaladin rescued Dalinar and retreated with what remained of his army. Dalinar commended Kaladin for his actions and promised that he would ensure their safety from Sadeas. A Promise Kept\nWhen they arrived back at the warcamps, Kaladin and the rest of Bridge Four accompanied Dalinar to confront Sadeas. Dalinar offered to pay an exorbitant sum of money, sixty emerald broams each, for the freedom of each bridgemen, but Sadeas refused. Finally, Dalinar offered his Shardblade Oathbringer in exchange for the men, which proved to be an offer Sadeas couldn’t refuse. With the deal made, Dalinar walked up to a shocked Kaladin and instructed him to gather the men he left behind and go to his warcamp. Later that night, Dalinar offered to make the bridgemen soldiers in his army, with Bridge Four becoming his personal guard. Kaladin accepted an appointment to the rank of captain, agreeing after Dalinar promised him an extraordinary amount of authority and autonomy for a darkeyes.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridge Four', 'order': 29, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e1b6c195-3169-473a-b16e-db5bded22993'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Bridge Four \nIn , Tvlakv sold Kaladin and the other slaves to Hashal, the wife of the lighteyed officer who was in charge of the slaves in Highprince Sadeas\'s army. She was not impressed with the slaves, but Kaladin stood out as he was still far more muscled than the others. When asked, Kaladin confirmed he used to be a spearman in Amaram\'s army. After inspecting his brands, and remarking that a "shash" glyph meant death, Hashal asked how he got here. Kaladin responded that he killed someone while drunk, and spoke of his talents with a spear and asked her to give him a chance to fight again in her brightlord’s army. However, Tvlakv told Hashal not to listen to him as he was a deserter, and could not be trusted as he had led rebellions before. Any slaves he might have had corrupted were assigned to be bridgemen while Kaladin was assigned specifically to Bridge Four, the bridge crew with the worst reputation and casualty rate. Kaladin was placed under the command of the bridge sergeant Gaz and was immediately forced to go on a bridge run completely unprepared and unequipped. Bridge Four was sent to carry a large bridge, allowing Sadeas\' soldiers to cross the plateaus of the Shattered Plains and assault the Parshendi. Gaz ran beside Bridge Four, calling out commands during the run due to their most recent bridgeleader having tossed himself down the Honor Chasm. He sent Kaladin to the open slot at the tail of the bridge. Without a vest, the wooden supports dug into Kaladin’s skin causing his shoulders to bleed. As they ran, a nearby bridgeman offered Kaladin advice. Eventually, Gaz called them to a stop and they lifted the bridge into place, allowing the army to pass. They repeated this process, with Kaladin eventually asking why they weren’t turning around. One of the other bridgemen just chuckled and told him they weren’t there yet and to be glad they weren’t. After more than a dozen times, Gaz ordered Kaladin to the front for the final push, declaring that newcomers get to go first. Kaladin quickly realized why arriving was the worst part.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridge Four', 'order': 29, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e1b6c195-3169-473a-b16e-db5bded22993'}, page_content='Kaladin - The Parshendi volleys launched, killing the men around Kaladin. They eventually got the bridge dropped, but at the expense of the bridgemen, resulting in many casualties. Kaladin just collapsed, knowing he should move or at least bind his wounds, but he just couldn’t, falling unconscious instead. Kaladin was about to be left for dead by the retreating bridge crews, until Syl called out his name and urged him to move. He forced himself to his feet and asked the windspren if she had a name.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridge Four', 'order': 29, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e1b6c195-3169-473a-b16e-db5bded22993'}, page_content='Kaladin - As he limped through the casualties, he found the body of the leathery faced man who had been nice to him. He harvested his vest and shoes, tying them on as the windspren introduced herself as Sylphrena.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Honor Chasm', 'order': 30, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '17b77a57-3c83-4bac-aea3-d7f5b560699b'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Honor Chasm \n\nOver next few weeks, Kaladin grew more and more depressed. Of the twenty-five men who had survived his first bridge deployment, twenty-three had died leaving only Kaladin and one other man. Bridge Four continued to be replenished, with many of those men dying to only to be replaced. They went through countless bridgeleaders, which typically was a favored position on a bridge crew, always getting to run in the best places. However, in Bridge Four, that didn’t matter. Kaladin didn’t bother to learn the names of the bridgemen as it just seemed pointless. One day, as they were working in the lumberyard, new recruits were brought in to be assigned to the bridge crews. Kaladin looked up and a young boy barely fourteen or fifteen caught his eye, reminding him of Tien. He had the same frightened eyes which immediately made Kaladin’s protective instinct kick in.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Honor Chasm', 'order': 30, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '17b77a57-3c83-4bac-aea3-d7f5b560699b'}, page_content='Kaladin - However, all he could think of was how everyone he’d tried to protect ended up dead. Syl, unable to bear seeing Kaladin in such a hopeless state, decided to leave, afraid of what would happen to her if she stayed. On the next bridge run, the youth and the last man that survived Kaladin’s initial bridge run died, leaving Kaladin the senior member of Bridge Four. Faced with losing Syl, his only friend, and his inability to protect the boy, Kaladin seriously contemplated suicide. That night, he went to the Honor Chasm, intending to jump off. Before Kaladin could step off the ledge, Syl returned, excitedly carrying a leaf of blackbane with her. Syl, in her naivety, having seen Kaladin previously take heart in having the poisonous leaves with him, assumed they would make Kaladin feel better. Syl recalled how everything seemed to go wrong when he lost the leaves, how he used to fight and make his soldiers feel like family. She admitted that was one of the things that drew her to him to begin with. Kaladin just lamented that he failed, that everything he touches withers and dies. Syl pleaded with him to give it one more try, reminding him that he couldn’t hurt the bridgemen any worse.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Honor Chasm', 'order': 30, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '17b77a57-3c83-4bac-aea3-d7f5b560699b'}, page_content='Kaladin - Opening his eyes, he left the chasm and resolved himself to become bridgeleader. He marched up to Gaz and seized the man by the throat, sweeping his legs out from under him. Kaladin then intimidated and bribed the man into giving him the position along with the autonomy to run Bridge Four. Entering Bridge Four’s barrack that night, Kaladin found the men all huddled inside just as he left them. Kaladin visited with each man, introducing himself as bridgeleader and learning each of their names. Later, Kaladin went to sleep with a sense of purpose in protecting the men.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Reforming Bridge Four', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '036d9fa3-5692-49a2-ab0e-8c1b9f2f0fb1'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Reforming Bridge Four \nThe next morning, Kaladin resolved to make some changes in Bridge Four. The first of these included training early in the mornings, putting an end to the group’s sleeping in. When Moash protested, Kaladin punched him in the gut and threw him over his shoulder, taking him outside. The others, shocked and not wanting to suffer the same fate, filed out into the sunlight. As Kaladin outlined his plan, he was immediately met with resistance from his fellow bridgemen who felt chores and bridge runs were more than enough to build their endurance. Kaladin argued that his primary duty was to keep them alive and since he couldn’t do anything about Parshendi arrows, he had to make them stronger. Moash called over to Gaz and asked if they had to listen to Kaladin to which Gaz replied that the bridgeleader only had authority on the field. Moash looked back to Kaladin and told him to storm off, causing the rest of the men to leave as well. Kaladin, undeterred by the men’s resistance, went off to the lumberyard to train by himself. He eventually attracted a crowd that included Teft, Rock, Dunny, and some of the other members of Bridge Four. Before the next bridge run, Kaladin visited an apothecary to purchase some supplies so he could tend to the wounded. However, he quickly discovered that antiseptic was expensive, despite knobweed reeds growing just outside of camp. Kaladin settled on a needle and gut as well as some bandages, spending the four marks he had left from paying Gaz off. Returning to camp just as the bells sounded, Kaladin yelled for the men to line up for the next bridge run. As the men neared the Parshendi lines, Kaladin demanded to switch with Rock, taking the most dangerous center-front spot of the bridge for himself, a rarity for a bridgeleader. During the assault, Kaladin was adamant on rescuing the six who fell. He dragged Hobber and Dabbid to safety with the help of Rock.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Reforming Bridge Four', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '036d9fa3-5692-49a2-ab0e-8c1b9f2f0fb1'}, page_content='Kaladin - As he turned to go back out to the field, Teft and Rock stopped him, going back to check on the other three. They returned with Leyten, the only other survivor. Kaladin quickly started to work, providing medical care to the wounded men. After the long battle, they returned to camp with their three wounded in tow much to Gaz’s protests. Because bridgemen were supposed to be expendable, Kaladin was told that he could keep tending to the wounded men, but they would not be paid or fed while they were unable to work. Not wanting to give in to Brightlord Sadeas, the bridgeleader asked other members of Bridge Four to pitch in money and food to care for the men. However, all refused except for Rock.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Reforming Bridge Four', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '036d9fa3-5692-49a2-ab0e-8c1b9f2f0fb1'}, page_content='Kaladin - He offered to share his food with Hobber, who was the least injured of the three. Knowing it would only be a matter of time before the rotspren were attracted to the wounded, Kaladin came up with the idea of collecting knobweed stems during stone-gathering detail. With the stems, he could create the antiseptic the men desperately needed and even sell some to get more supplies and food. Gaining the trust of Rock and Teft, Kaladin enlisted their help to find and collect the knobweed during their new detail. Syl assisted as well, finding patches of knobweed and guiding Rock—who was mysteriously able to see her—to them. While working to extract the sap that night, Kaladin started building camaraderie with the two men, even managing to get Rock to open up and share some of his life story. Kaladin returned to the apothecary and made a deal for his bridge crew to gather knobweed sap in return for a skymark per bottle of sap and some bandages. Upon returning from selling the sap, Gaz sent Bridge Four to do chasm duty, recovering valuables from the war dead who had fallen into the chasms. In the chasms, Kaladin continued to build rapport with the men, bringing Dunny into the fold, who sang for the men while others hovered behind. Through their work, Kaladin came across a spear in the chasms. Picking it up and holding it drew the ire of Moash, Sigzil, and Earless Jaks, who began taunting the bridgeleader. Ignoring their gibes, Kaladin closed his eyes and went into a trance. He performed an advanced practice kata with the spear, revealing his talent as a genius spearman to the men, leaving them speechless. This particular sequence would years later become known as the Chasm Kata. During the display, Teft, along with some of the other men, noticed an unknown spren—actually Syl—zipping around Kaladin. Through the rest of their chasm duty and on the walk back, more men started to open up. The night culminated in Kaladin using the money he had earned to purchase food and assigning Rock to cook a stew. Not a single person refused to partake in eating around the fire.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Reforming Bridge Four', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '036d9fa3-5692-49a2-ab0e-8c1b9f2f0fb1'}, page_content='Kaladin - The next day, a majority of the men followed his orders to rise out of bed and practice.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Side Carry', 'order': 32, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f02a3e4a-f7c9-4f29-8108-7d560c3898dd'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Side Carry \nKaladin managed to get all the men to submit to his authority and participate in training. The training cut down on their losses, but Kaladin was still unsatisfied. Realizing that the bridge itself could act as a shield, Kaladin started training the men to shift the bridge and carry it on its side. The practice was slow going, which left Gaz pleased at the prospect of Bridge Four losing more members. Prior to the next bridge run, Kaladin gained Lopen as a member from a new batch of recruits. They were immediately sent the next run. Realizing it was going to be a difficult approach, Kaladin ordered Bridge Four to perform the side carry as they engaged the Parshendi. The side carry was a success as it completely protected Kaladin’s men. However, other bridge crews tried to emulate the side carry.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Side Carry', 'order': 32, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f02a3e4a-f7c9-4f29-8108-7d560c3898dd'}, page_content='Kaladin - Not having trained in the maneuver, the other bridge crews failed. Lacking a sufficient number of bridges to cross the chasms and with the timing of the assault desynchronized, the battle was thrown into chaos and  Sadeas lost. Understanding that he’d undermined the army’s strategy, Kaladin ordered Rock and Teft to stand down and Kaladin stepped up to Gaz and Lamaril to accept his fate.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "The Stormfather's Judgement", 'order': 33, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ef3d3423-4ed8-4370-837d-13d364223adb'}, page_content="Kaladin - The Stormfather's Judgement\n\nAs punishment for the failure, Highprince Sadeas demoted several officers and executed Lamaril, the lighteyed officer directly in charge of the bridgemen. Sadeas declined to execute Kaladin directly, but instead decided to let the Stormfather judge him. Kaladin would be freed if he could survive being tied to the side of Bridge Four’s barrack during the highstorm. Prior to the highstorm, Rock, Teft, and Moash came to see Kaladin and promised they would remember him. Kaladin asked them to tell the men to come out after the storm and they will see that he had survived. Teft gave Kaladin a dun sphere for good luck and the men retreated into the barracks as the storm approached. As the storm raged and slammed into Kaladin, Syl told him to grab the roof and then the ring that his rope was attached to. He did as she said knowing that if he let go, he’d be dangling in the air again. However, the rain numbed his fingers and caused him to slip, flapping in the air again."), Document(metadata={'heading': "The Stormfather's Judgement", 'order': 33, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ef3d3423-4ed8-4370-837d-13d364223adb'}, page_content='Kaladin - As he hit the roof, everything went black and silent. During the darkness, Kaladin met the Stormfather in the form of a large, inhuman face. Immediately after, Kaladin’s Surgebinding abilities manifested and he drew upon Stormlight from the glowing blue sphere before falling unconscious.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kaladin Stormblessed', 'order': 34, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '54736fc1-8e74-4068-8426-b1e72bfa2425'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Kaladin Stormblessed \nAfter the highstorm, the bridgemen followed Rock and Teft to go check on Kaladin. The bridgeleader hung by his ankles, his skin sliced in a hundred places.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kaladin Stormblessed', 'order': 34, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '54736fc1-8e74-4068-8426-b1e72bfa2425'}, page_content='Kaladin - Just as the men gathered around him horrified, Kaladin’s eyes snapped open. His hand dropped the sphere that had been given to him, now dun, shocking Teft who knew the sphere should be infused. Wanting answers, he told Kaladin he better survive and the men rushed to cut him down. They cared for him and posted a constant guard by his bed. His injuries were severe, even attracting Deathspren. While recovering, Teft brought three infused spheres telling Kaladin he couldn’t leave them. He watched as Kaladin unconsciously consumed the Stormlight, causing Teft to suspect he may be a member of the Knights Radiant. Ten days later, Kaladin made a miraculous recovery and his men, never having known of his previous army service, revived the name Kaladin Stormblessed.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Transforming Bridge Four into spearmen', 'order': 35, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6370fb73-950d-4a84-89a8-bfc32279dbe0'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Transforming Bridge Four into spearmen \nAfter his recovery, Kaladin accompanied Bridge Four on their next bridge run. Once they dropped the bridge, Kaladin watched the battle raging on the next plateau alongside Rock and Sigzil. The latter asked why the bridgemen weren’t allowed to use shields during runs. Rock suggested that shields would slow them down, but Kaladin realized it was because they were bait. Kaladin slipped into despair as he realized there was no hope for his men. Things were compounded the next day when Kaladin met Matal, their new commander, and was re-acquainted with his wife, Hashal. She informed Kaladin that her husband would not run the bridge crews with the same laxness as his predecessor. Hashal then permanently assigned Bridge Four to chasm duty. Given the new orders and knowing their place as bait, Kaladin realized that further training as bridgemen would be a futile endeavor. Instead, he proposed training the men to become spearmen in order to escape, which his men accepted. During a highstorm, Kaladin dreamed he was the storm, traveling east to west, seeing the ground from the perspective of the storm itself. He passed over the Shattered Plains, the Sea of Spears, Kholinar, the Horneater Peaks, and countless other cities and villages.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Transforming Bridge Four into spearmen', 'order': 35, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6370fb73-950d-4a84-89a8-bfc32279dbe0'}, page_content='Kaladin - His path crossed Szeth’s in the middle of an assassination. Finally, he met the Stormfather once again, who left him with a cryptic message regarding the Oathpact being shattered and Odium reigning. Kaladin gasped awake to find himself being restrained. He attacked his “assailants,” but quickly realized they were just members of Bridge Four. They told him he had been in a fever dream and that he tried to walk out into the highstorm. Shaking off his vision, Kaladin went to clean up, even letting Rock give him a shave. Later that day, Bridge Four was given a new recruit, a parshman that Kaladin named Shen. Kaladin found himself walking around Sadeas’ warcamp an hour later, still worried about his dream. He asked Syl if she knew anything about Odium, which caused her to hiss and flee immediately to a nearby building. Before he could ask why the word set her off, Kaladin heard a series of curses behind him. Turning, Kaladin witnessed Adolin Kholin saving a prostitute from being beaten by a lighteyed officer. Choosing to escort the prostitute to the border, Adolin threw an emerald chip to Kaladin and told him to deliver a message that he couldn’t make his meeting and would reschedule. Kaladin took the money, but didn’t deliver the message due to his disdain of Adolin’s attitude and lighteyes in general. Syl returned, but was distressed at Kaladin’s increasingly dark attitude concerning lighteyes and his breach of the implicit agreement to do as Adolin asked. During their chasm duty detail, Kaladin secretly began training Bridge Four, which had now dwindled to twenty-four members, as spearmen. To assist with the training, Kaladin tricked Teft into revealing that he had been a soldier and appointed him to oversee the men. To maintain their cover of working in the chasms, he assigned Lopen, Rock, Dabbid, and Shen to do the actual salvage work with Syl’s assistance.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Transforming Bridge Four into spearmen', 'order': 35, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6370fb73-950d-4a84-89a8-bfc32279dbe0'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin was impressed at the men’s progress after only a few hours and remarked that thanks to their adverse conditions, they were ironically the most motivated and fit recruits he had ever seen. In one of the next bridge runs, Dunny was killed. Frustrated, Kaladin began rescuing members from other bridge crews, commanding his men to carry them back to the barracks despite barely having enough resources to care for his own men. Kaladin’s actions coupled with the fact that the arrows seemed to dodge him when he ran point further raised Teft’s suspicions about the bridgeleader being a Knight Radiant. During chasm duty a week after Dunny’s passing, Bridge Four found slightly more than an emerald broam’s worth of money, including an actual emerald broam. With the money, they realized they could not only feed and care for the wounded bridgemen, but they could also advance their escape plan. Kaladin decided to turn over the emerald broam—an amount of money that no bridgeman could ever safely spend—but kept the rest. Rock, though an avowed pacifist, took up a bow and attached the pouch to the underside of one of the permanent bridges using an arrow. Lopen covertly retrieved the money during their next bridge runs and turned the money over to Kaladin.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Discovery of Surgebinding powers', 'order': 36, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '551be0e8-6e44-46e3-ab96-976cf588915f'}, page_content='Kaladin - Discovery of Surgebinding powers\n\nIn one of the next runs, Bridge Four dropped to just twenty-six members when both Maps and Arik died. Kaladin struggled to deal with their deaths, worried that soon he’d be the only one left.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Discovery of Surgebinding powers', 'order': 36, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '551be0e8-6e44-46e3-ab96-976cf588915f'}, page_content="Kaladin - The rest of Bridge Four also appeared anxious as they fell in with their bridgeleader. Returning to camp, Kaladin dismissed the men, who in turn gave him a salute that Teft taught them. Teft lingered, allowing the bridgeleader to look at his arm. Under the ruse, Teft punched Kaladin, forcing him to unconsciously use his powers to defend himself. Kaladin demanded to know what Teft was doing, who just replied that he was testing something. Before either man could discuss it further, Lopen pointed out that Kaladin was glowing. Grabbing Teft, Kaladin demanded to know what he’d done to him. Teft denied doing anything, pointing out that Kaladin had been feeding off Stormlight since he’d been sick. Seeing Syl out of the corner of his eye, Kaladin confronted the spren about his powers. Realizing they come from the Knights Radiant, Kaladin grew scared and wanted to be rid of them. Syl questioned why he’d want to be rid of something of the Windrunners. Kaladin wondered if he was cursed, which caused Syl to run away. When Lopen and Teft found him, Kaladin fled, overwhelmed at his new discovery. That night, Kaladin came across Hoid, who told him the story of Derethil and the Wandersail, a story that Kaladin interpreted as one about taking responsibility. Before Hoid left, he gave Kaladin a Trailman's flute and charged him with looking after his apprentice, Sigzil, who he now graduated to a full Worldsinger. Syl, who was present for the story, returned to Kaladin and explained she was behind what was happening to him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Discovery of Surgebinding powers', 'order': 36, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '551be0e8-6e44-46e3-ab96-976cf588915f'}, page_content='Kaladin - Syl offered to cut off their bond, but it would leave them both crippled. However, Kaladin decided to accept the responsibility that Surgebinding represented and use the power to help others. Kaladin spent the next week trying to learn how to use his Surgebinding powers with Teft’s help with little to no success while Bridge Four continued to train under Rock’s leadership. While trying to learn Surgebinding, Teft told Kaladin what he knew of the Knights Radiant, teaching him the First Ideal of the Immortal Words. Their training was interrupted when Hashal came to visit. She informed Kaladin that Bridge Four would now go on every bridge run, citing they were a “model” for the other crews. They would no longer get the normal break between runs, a further reprisal for the side carry incident, and would now do chasm duty at night. Responding to the increased danger this change brought, Kaladin came up with a plan to use the skins of dead Parshendi found in the chasms as armor. In order to bring the armor out of the chasms, Kaladin successfully managed to use his powers to run up a wall and attach the armor to the underside of the permanent bridge they originally used to hide the spheres. During one of the next bridge runs, Kaladin donned the carapace armor and ran ahead of the bridge crews, drawing the attention of the Parshendi. The desecration of a Parshendi corpse enraged the warriors who focused all of their efforts on Kaladin, ignoring everyone else on the battlefield. Drawing in Stormlight, Kaladin dodged arrows, his muscles reacting quickly. As Bridge Four came into range, an arrow cut open Kaladin’s arm, but to his surprise, it began to seal up instead of bleed. Continuing to serve as a distraction, Kaladin’s Surgebinding abilities protected him and the bridge crews from any harm, marking his plan a resounding success. While Bridge Four was resting and watching Kaladin treat a Thaylen man, a group of Parshendi soldiers attempted to ambush them. However, Dalinar Kholin came to their rescue and saluted them as he left. Given the success of the carapace armor, Matal gave Kaladin permission to outfit all of Bridge Four in the armor, with his wife Hashal claiming it was her idea the entire time. He set Leyten, an apprentice armorer, to work on making the sets of carapace armor with the help of the wounded men. Meanwhile, the spearmen’s training advanced rapidly, with Moash and Skar emerging as the most skilled.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle of the Tower', 'order': 37, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e6396f69-be42-468e-9300-c52f576f7052'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Battle of the Tower \nTen days later, on , Bridge Four participated in the Battle of the Tower, where the combined armies of Highprinces Sadeas and Dalinar assaulted the Tower. By this time, they had not only perfected using the carapace armor and large wooden shields, but they had made enough sets to outfit the entire unit. Kaladin led the charge, staying in front of the other decoys, trying to distract the Parshendi forces as best he could. However, his efforts weren’t as successful as the first time he donned the armor.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle of the Tower', 'order': 37, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e6396f69-be42-468e-9300-c52f576f7052'}, page_content='Kaladin - Five bridge crews dropped, slaughtered right where they ran.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle of the Tower', 'order': 37, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e6396f69-be42-468e-9300-c52f576f7052'}, page_content='Kaladin - While Bridge Four fared better, they didn’t arrive unscathed. Skar and Teft both suffered injuries, which Kaladin tended to once they reached the Tower. Once Kaladin finished, he surveyed the battlefield and to his surprise, Sadeas was retreating. At first, he thought something must be wrong, but then he quickly realized that Sadeas had set up a trap, abandoning Dalinar and his men on the Tower with no means of escape. Bridge Four retreated with the rest of Sadeas’ army, lagging behind so they could carry their wounded. As Kaladin carried the bridge, he had the idea of using the battle to escape, allowing the army to think that his men had been killed. Once Matal agreed to leave them behind, Kaladin explained the details of the escape to the men and offered to stay behind with the wounded men. Bridge Four protested, but Kaladin commanded them to stick to the plan. However, there was more than just the wounded men plaguing him. Looking back to the Tower, he watched as Dalinar and his men continued fighting. The men of Bridge Four asked if there was anything they could do, but Kaladin refused, claiming it would be suicide. Syl, who had taken up the form of a full-sized person, spoke up and revealed that she remembered being an honorspren, a spirit of oaths, promises, and nobility. After a moment of internal conflict, Kaladin ordered his men to turn around and head back towards Dalinar’s army. Kaladin led Bridge Four as they charged the plateau in hopes of giving Dalinar’s army a chance to escape. He was filled with one purpose only and that was to protect.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle of the Tower', 'order': 37, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e6396f69-be42-468e-9300-c52f576f7052'}, page_content='Kaladin - He ran ahead, dodging arrows, but he quickly realized something was wrong. Syl drew his attention back to Bridge Four and the many arrows pointed at their unshielded flank. He ordered them to go into the side carry position to deflect the arrows, something they hadn’t done in weeks. Reaching his crew, he turned just in time to see more archers behind them drawing for a large volley. He screamed and threw every bit of Stormlight he could into his shield, pulling over a hundred arrows into it. Seeing what Kaladin had done, both groups of Parshendi that had released volleys turned and fled. Knowing that Kaladin was in no condition to run the bridge, Moash led the rest of the men onwards to help Dalinar. Kaladin crawled to the edge of the chasm and asked Syl if she could help make him stronger, but she shook her head. As he listened to the sounds of war and death around him, he was transported back to the most horrible of days, the day Tien died. When he snapped out of his trance, Syl asked him if he knew the Words. Wanting to save his men, Kaladin took up a spear and spoke the Second Ideal of the Windrunners, progressing his path to becoming a member of the Knights Radiant. Kaladin fought with amazing prowess, his natural talents enhanced to unnatural levels by Stormlight. He single-handedly engaged and defeated dozens of Parshendi. Kaladin and his men held the bridge until Dalinar’s soldiers were able to fight their way to them. During the brief respite, the bridgeleader checked on his men, learning they had suffered three casualties and several injuries. Kaladin organized the retreat, putting Teft in charge of the bridgemen and keeping Moash by his side. Upon closer inspection of the Alethi soldiers, Kaladin realized that neither Highprince Dalinar nor Adolin were with them. Heading back to the front lines, Kaladin found the Cobalt Guard, the group sworn to protect Adolin, still fighting. Knowing they wouldn’t leave without their highprince, Kaladin searched for Adolin and ordered him to retreat. However, Adolin refused to leave without his father. Kaladin convinced him to go with Moash while he went to retrieve Dalinar. He leapt over the chasm to where Dalinar was fighting with Eshonai, both of whom were utilizing a full set of Shards. Fighting a Shardbearer for a second time, Kaladin rescued Dalinar and retreated with what remained of his army. Dalinar commended Kaladin for his actions and promised that he would ensure their safety from Sadeas.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'A Promise Kept', 'order': 38, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ea2e66c1-1ea2-4d4a-a4c4-ca6ee153fa87'}, page_content='Kaladin - A Promise Kept\nWhen they arrived back at the warcamps, Kaladin and the rest of Bridge Four accompanied Dalinar to confront Sadeas. Dalinar offered to pay an exorbitant sum of money, sixty emerald broams each, for the freedom of each bridgemen, but Sadeas refused. Finally, Dalinar offered his Shardblade Oathbringer in exchange for the men, which proved to be an offer Sadeas couldn’t refuse. With the deal made, Dalinar walked up to a shocked Kaladin and instructed him to gather the men he left behind and go to his warcamp.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'A Promise Kept', 'order': 38, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ea2e66c1-1ea2-4d4a-a4c4-ca6ee153fa87'}, page_content='Kaladin - Later that night, Dalinar offered to make the bridgemen soldiers in his army, with Bridge Four becoming his personal guard. Kaladin accepted an appointment to the rank of captain, agreeing after Dalinar promised him an extraordinary amount of authority and autonomy for a darkeyes.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174) \n\n Rebuilding the Army \nAfter the massive casualties at the Battle of the Tower, Kaladin was tasked with turning the remaining bridgemen into a standing army. He promoted Teft, Moash, Skar, Rock and Sigzil to lieutenants, a rank between captain and sergeant, to form a command structure for a thousand men. More specifically, Kaladin named Rock quartermaster, with Lopen as his second, and appointed Sigzil to be their clerk as he was the only one who could read glyphs. He put Teft in charge of training, suggesting that he combine the remaining bridgemen into twenty crews and train two members in each to go back and train the others. Kaladin promised a few men to assist Teft, but explained that would have to do as most of Bridge Four, including Moash and Skar, would be needed to keep Dalinar alive. Without the highprince, Kaladin feared that the bridgemen would just be sold back to Torol Sadeas by his successor. With word spreading that the emperor of Azir was dead at the hands of the Assassin in White, Kaladin reminded Teft that the assassin had already killed Gavilar and they just had to hope he was done. Regardless, they had to protect Dalinar at all costs. Freedom, Bridge Four \nOnce in agreement, they rounded up the rest of the men in Bridge Four and went to get their slave brands covered with tattoos. Hobber sat down first, with each man following, receiving tattoos that said “Freedom, Bridge Four.” Sitting down last, Kaladin closed his eyes and waited for the tattooist to finish. She cursed, revealing that the tattoo ink wouldn’t take."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin sighed, realizing he was unconsciously holding Stormlight in his veins. He banished the Stormlight and she tried again, the ink taking this time. He looked in the mirror, seeing his slave brands covered up for a moment. Syl landed on his shoulder and he unconsciously sucked in Stormlight which melted the tattoo. The tattooist cursed again and picked up her rag, preparing to try again.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content="Kaladin - However, Kaladin insisted that it was fine and tossed a small bag of spheres to the tattooist. Upon Bridge Four’s return to the barracks, Rind was waiting for them with their new Cobalt Guard uniforms. While the men eagerly tried on their uniforms, Teft hesitated, unsure if he deserved to wear something like this again. Kaladin objected, saying the uniform was what he was and not to let the slave rule him. Teft countered, asking Kaladin when he was going to admit he was doing the same thing. Teft tried to convince him that he needed to show Dalinar that he was a Surgebinder and a lighteyes. However, Kaladin confessed that he had everything taken away from him by the lighteyes and for now, he couldn’t let them take this too. Dropping the subject, Teft put on his uniform and joined the others. With the uniforms sorted out, the men cut off the insignia of the Cobalt Guard, declaring themselves Bridge Four. Becoming What Dalinar Needs \nKaladin set up rotations to protect Dalinar, always assigning himself, Moash, or Skar for the Blackthorn. After a small council, Dalinar wished for Kaladin and his best men to take on more duties extending to protecting Navani, his sons and eventually King Elhokar himself. Dalinar confessed that there may have already been an attempt on the king’s life when the gemstones on his Shardplate seemed to be sabotaged. Unsure of who to trust, Dalinar asked Kaladin to familiarize himself with how the King’s Guard works and to learn from them. Once their training was complete, Kaladin would be in charge of a new group guarding the king consisting of some of the old King’s Guard and Kaladin’s own men. Kaladin worried that his men were stretched thin, but Dalinar said he was not alone in that problem. During a trip to the chasms, Kaladin asked Syl what she thought about Dalinar’s plan to reform the Knights Radiant. She exclaimed that not only was it a wonderful idea, but she was jealous that he thought of it first. He then asked her if a spren could be writing the glyphs on the wall. While she didn’t know, Syl admitted that she had seen a spren like red lightning, a dangerous spren. Kaladin asked Syl if there were more like him. Though she expected the question, she didn’t answer him at first. She eventually told him that there were others like him as spren, those she didn’t know, tried to reclaim what was lost. Syl goes on to say that Kaladin has to become what Dalinar is looking for and not to make him search in vain. While in the chasms, Sigzil conducted some baseline tests of Kaladin’s Surgebinding abilities with Rock and Lopen’s assistance. They had to rely on counting as Sigzil didn’t have a proper clock to time Kaladin, nor did he even know how to measure Stormlight. Kaladin suggested that they use chips since they were weighed before being encased in glass. However, Sigzil worried that he was wasting Kaladin’s time as there was still so much about Stormlight that they didn’t know. Lopen reassured him that it wasn’t a waste and asked if Kaladin could stick him to the wall. Able to do so, Rock commented that this skill could be very useful in battle. They continued to experiment further with his new abilities, the others taking up spears to test him. Just like with his spear, Kaladin knew these new abilities would take lots of practice. This meant Kaladin would have to find a new person like himself to spar with. Calling it a day, the men returned to the warcamp and to the news that a hero had come to the Shattered Plains. Kaladin’s heart became ice when he heard the hero was none other than Highlord Amaram, the man who stole Kaladin’s Shardblade and branded him a slave. Preparing for the Assassin in White \nKaladin led a patrol through the Lighteyes' training grounds with Moash and Drehy, to guard Adolin and Renarin. Syl encouraged Kaladin to tell Dalinar about Amaram, but he refused, thinking he wouldn't be believed."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin talked with Zahel, an ex-soldier ardent, but was left alone soon after. Kaladin asked Syl if she found Zahel weird, and she replied saying all humans other than Rock seemed weird. Later, Kaladin watched Zahel train Renarin. Zahel was having Renarin jump off the roof of the grounds to practice being comfortable with Shardplate's strength. Kaladin mocked Renarin's clumsiness, but Zahel countered, saying Renarin had a good attitude about it. Zahel offered Kaladin the chance to train under him, but Kaladin declined. Kaladin participated in a mock duel with Zahel, who used a blunted Shardblade. Kaladin lost, but Zahel believed Kaladin could have given someone enough time to escape in a real fight. Adolin, who had been practicing further away, insulted Kaladin, which angered him. Kaladin charged at Adolin in a fit of rage, but was quickly defeated, as Adolin was wearing Shardplate. Zahel berated the prince for his carelessness. Kaladin used Stormlight to heal himself, and ran at Adolin again, only to lose his strength and collapse. Zahel commended Kaladin for his quick thinking, but claimed it would not be enough against a Shardbearer. Kaladin asked Syl why his energy suddenly dissapeared, and she responded, saying he was not protecting anyone while attacking Adolin. During each highstorm, Kaladin gathered all those who were under his protection in one location to make it easier to keep them safe. However, he blamed himself when the countdown to the Everstorm continued to appear. After a particular highstorm, King Elhokar was nearly killed after the railing of the balcony he was standing on broke free. Kaladin and Dalinar concluded that the support was cut with a Shardblade and that it was an assassination attempt. Later, Kaladin approached Dalinar and told him about Amaram's betrayal and Kaladin's branding. Dalinar was doubtful, believing Amaram to be an honorable man, but agreed to look into it. This angered Kaladin, leaving him unsatisfied with Dalinar’s promise. Kaladin figured he'd take matters into his own hands, but Syl countered, saying Kaladin was not a Skybreaker and was worrying her. Soon after, Dalinar requested that Kaladin and his men learn how to ride horses, as they might be useful in the future. The groom thought it was absurd for darkeyes to learn horseback riding, but she taught them anyways. Kaladin was hesitant to learn at first, but he did so anyway, at the wishes of Dalinar. At first, he rode an old, mellow horse named Spray, until Adolin rode by and taunted him for not riding a fast horse. He jokingly told Kaladin he should ride Dreamstorm, a wild and violent horse. Kaladin decided to do so, and mounted the horse. As it bucked him wildly, he was forced to lash himself to the saddle using Adhesion, lest he get flung off. He was whipped around, until he finally ran out of Stormlight, flinging him several feet in the air and landing across the stable."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content="Kaladin - The attempt impressed Adolin, so he apologized for taunting him. Kaladin talked with Natam about the assassination attempt, and who was on the balcony. Natam told Kaladin that the only person on the balcony after the storm was Moash, before riding away. The next highstorm, Kaladin had a dream in which the Stormfather visited him. The Stormfather said that Kaladin would soon betray Syl, thereby killing her. When he woke up, Syl told him that something was wrong, and that The One Who Hates was coming. Kaladin, trusting Syl's word, entered Dalinar's room and warned the of the impending danger. Dalinar trusted Kaladin's instincts, so he retrieved the king and they all fled from the palace. Hobber and Beld scouted ahead, while Moash and Elinor stayed by Elhokar."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content='Kaladin - As they ran, they came to a dark hallway with the spheres drained and a large cut in the wall.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content='Kaladin - Szeth appeared from the darkness shortly after. Kaladin, Dalinar, and Adolin fought Szeth, while Renarin and other Bridge Four members escorted the king out of the palace. Eventually, Adolin was defeated and Kaladin\'s arm was severed by Szeth\'s Honorblade. This left Dalinar to fend for himself. As Dalinar fought Szeth, Kaladin arrived and pushed both him and Szeth through the hole in wall, and they tumbled to the ground. As they fell to the ground, Kaladin consumed Stormlight from Szeth\'s reserves, which allowed him to heal himself from the fall. Szeth was shocked at Kaladin\'s survival, and denied the return of the Knights Radiant. He fled after he saw Kaladin heal his arm, and Kaladin collapes from exhaustion. Kaladin soon woke up and reentered the palace, searching for any dead or injured. He found Dalinar and the others resting and tending to any wounded. Dalinar expressed his surprise at Kaladin\'s survival, and Kaladin lied, saying he lived due to Szeth\'s abilities. Kaladin left to search for his men, and found Beld\'s dead body, along with Hobber, who had lost his legs from Szeth\'s blade. Upon seeing he could barely defend against a Shardbearer, Kaladin visited Zahel and asked if he could train under him. Training Continues\nKaladin continued to lead training of the bridge crews, and assigned Teft to train Bridge Seventeen in the chasms. Kaladin wanted to defeat Szeth, now that the bridgemen were mostly safe. While he surveyed training, Kaladin met with Sigzil, Rock, and Lopen, to further discuss Kaladin\'s abilities. After many attempts, Kaladin fianlly Lashed himself to the chasm wall. Kaladin experimented a little, before he and the others returned to the barracks. They were met with a tense dinner gathering. Renarin Kholin had come to the fire, and asked Kaladin if he could join Bridge Four. Kaladin allowed him to join, albeit with discomfort at letting a lighteyes join their ranks. Moash, Teft, and a few other bridgmen requested Kaladin go out with them to get drinks, but Kaladin declined the offer, and got some stew. After accepting Zahel\'s offer to train, Kaladin, Teft, Moash, and Yake visited the training grounds. Zahel had them each practice with one of the King\'s blades to get comfortable with the sight at one. They also practiced basic sword stances, which would allow them to better attack and defend against a Shardbearer. While taking a break, Kaladin noticed Shallan enter, who had come to update the Shardblade and Plate record. He walked with Adolin towards her, and they shared some banter. Kaladin returned to the water barrel, and Moash arrived shortly after. They discussed the reason for Moash\'s hatred towards the King, and Kaladin agreed to meet with the Moash\'s partners. He talked with Syl about what was right, and mentioned Dalinar\'s maneuver when fighting Szeth to Zahel, a lastclap, before training some more with the other men. Kaladin surveyed some of the bridge crews one night, before Syl convinced him to relax a litle and get some stew. He made his way back to Bridge Four\'s barracks, and was met with two Herdazians: Lopen\'s "cousins." Kaladin found Shen stacking bags of grain in the storage room, and Kaladin apologized for being hesitant to arm Shen. He handed a spear to Shen, before being called out by Moash. Upon Moash\'s prompting, Kaladin agreed to get drinks with some of the bridgemen. When they arrived, Peet got them a table and Rock told the story of his people. Eventually, Moash took Kaladin aside, and they met with Graves and some others, including Danlan, a women Adolin had previously courted. Graves asked Kaladin to consider assisting them on their mission to assassinate Elhokar, and Kaladin hesitantly agreed, to Syl\'s dismay. As they left the room, Kaladin forbid Moash from talking or meeting with Graves and the others again. One night, Kaladin strolled along the Shattered Plains, looking for the place at which he met Wit, months before. Upon reaching the desired location, Kaladin stepped off the edge, plummeting into the chasm. After sucking in Stormlight to assist with the landing, he took off in a jog and practiced Lashing himself to the walls of the chasm. After some time, he was able to do so without stumbling, and was soon able to repeatadly Lash himself quicker and more accurately. He threw caution aside and Lashed himself upward, towards the sky, and experienced true freedom and triumph for the first time after Tien\'s death. Soon, he was hurtling past chasms and plataues at incredible speeds. Kaladin Lashed himself higher and higher, before reluctantly returning to the ground, fearing he would run out of Stormlight. He conversed with Syl for a moment, before he retured to the warcamps. But rather than returning to Dalinar\'s camp, he traveled to Sadeas\', realizing he could kill Amaram right then and there. Syl pleaded for him not to and reminded Kaladin of the experience he just had.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content="Kaladin - Intent on not tainting the memory, Kaladin returned to  Dalinar's camp. Upon returning, he encountered Shen, who said he needed to leave, and gave Kaladin his real name: Rlain. He then departed. Adolin was guarded under Kaladin on the day he was supposed to meet with Shallan. As the pair made their way to the carriage, Kaladin realized the driver was none other than Wit. As the carriage moved along, Kaladin spoke with Wit, who revealed he knew about Kaladin's abilities. When they arrived at Sebarial's camp, Shallan hugged Wit, to everyone's surprise. Kaladin accompanied the couple to a menagerie in the Outer Market. On the way there, he rode in the carriage with Adolin and Shallan, as he was suspicious of her. Upon their arrival at the menagerie, Kaladin realized Wit was gone, replaced with one of Adolin's servants. Kaladin talked with Syl and walked with Adolin and Shallan as they observed the animals. Soon, Dalinar arrived, accompanied by Amaram, who was wearing a strange cloak. Dalinar then announced that the Knights Radiant had been reestablished, with Amaram at their head. Adolin's Duel\n\nDuring Adolin's duel against Relis Ruthar, Elit Ruthar, Abrobadar, and Jakamav, Kaladin guarded Dalinar and Elhokar while they watched the duel. After seeing Renarin enter the arena and quickly fall to the ground, Kaladin proclaimed honor dead, and asked Dalinar to take care of his men if things went poorly, before jumping into the arena to help Adolin. As he entered the arena, Syl promised this would be different than when Kaladin defended Amaram. Relis ignored Kaladin at first, but quickly realized his opponents' skill. Kaladin regrouped with Adolin and told him to focus on breaking their opponents Shardplate. Adolin requested Kaladin watch out for Renarin, who was very vulnerable. Kaladin drew Relis' attention while Adolin fought Elit and Jakamav. Relis dueled Kaladin for a short time, but then returned to fight Adolin. Kaladin used a lashing-enhanced kick to knock Relis down, breaking his own legs in process, though he was able to heal them using Stormlight. Kaladin noticed that he cracked some of Relis' shards with his kick. Adolin's own armor was mostly cracked, though he managed to land a strong blow on Elit's chest plate, cracking it and slowing Elit greatly, giving Kaladin the chance to force Elit to yield. The remaining three opponents gathered to battle Adolin, while Renarin sat alone in the sand. Kaladin demanded Elit give him his helm, who complied, and used it as a armored gauntlet, then continued to help Adolin. Relis and Jakamav both tried to attack Kaladin, but he was able to dodge their Shardblades or block them with the helm, until he ran out of Stormlight. At this point, Kaladin realized that he had been feeding it to the Plate in order to keep it from shattering. Kaladin eventually was backed against a wall, until Adolin appeared and grappled Jakamav to the ground. Kaladin noticed that Abrobadar had been defeated by Adolin as well. Relis, the last man standing, rushed toward Renarin, who was vulnerable. Kaladin followed, and yelled for Renarin to yield, however Renarin only dismissed his Blade, and did nothing more. Relis raised his Blade toward Renarin, but ended up swinging it at Kaladin, who then caught it in a lastclap. Relis heard the scream that came from Kaladin holding a Shardblade, and ran from the arena, forfeiting the duel. Jakamav demanded for Adolin to fight him as he was held down. Rather than actually fighting, Kaladin placed his knife in a crack in Jakamav's plate, and told him to yield. Jakamav yielded and Adolin was declared the victor. Adolin laughed joyously at the spoils he won and asked Kaladin to help him remove his drained armor. Elhokar announced how impressed he was by the duel, and offered Adolin a boon. Kaladin noticed Sadeas trying to leave the arena, but before Sadeas could slip away, Adolin demanded the right to duel Sadeas, right then and there. Kaladin, who realized this was his chance to duel Amaram, also demanded the right to challenge him, for his crimes of murder and obstruction of justice, which caused Amaram to cower. Next to Kaladin, Adolin groaned, and the crowd silenced. Elhokar ordered Kaladin to be arrested. After the duel, Dalinar, Elhokar, and Kaladin conversed in Dalinar's rooms. Kaladin sat chained to a seat, while Dalinar and Elhokar argued. Elhokar argued for Kaladin getting punished, Dalinar against. Eventually, they reached a compromise: imprisonment. Elhokar left, and Dalinar berated Kaladin for his actions. Soldiers soon came to take Kaladin, all of them respectful. As he shuffled through the camp, the eyes of soldiers and scribes fell upon him. When Kaladin reached his cell, he promised to never trust a lighteyes ever again. In Prison \nKaladin's prison cell was nicer than most, but he still hated it. He talked with Syl about Dalinar, and said he was just like all the other lighteyes, though he quickly took it back."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content='Kaladin - He tried to consume Stormlight from a nearby gem, but failed.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content="Kaladin - Soon, Wit entered unannounced, and sat on a bench. He carried a stringed instrument, which he was tuning. Despite Kaladin's reluctance, Wit began his story, one of a man named Fleet. In the story, Fleet raced against a highstorm across Roshar. In the end, Fleet reached Shinovar but collapsed and died from exhaustion, leaving his spirit to live in the storms. As Wit told the story, Kaladin interjected between lines, prompting Wit to continue. Kaladin was able to clearly see Fleet and the story being told in his head while his eyes were closed. As the tale came to a close, Wit and Kaladin discussed the origin of stories, before Wit left. Life dragged on in Kaladin's cell, though his accommodations were nice. When Dalinar entered the room, Kaladin jumped to attention and saluted him. They spoke about Elhokar and Dalinar's attempts to free Kaladin. Dalinar revealed what he knew about Roshone and how he ended up in Hearthstone, much to Kaladin's surprise. Dalinar encouraged Kaladin to act better, lest he ruin the reputation Kaladin had built for darkeyes. Upon Dalinar's departure, Kaladin contemplated what he would do, eventually coming to the decision that Elhokar had to die. As Kaladin's release seemed to seem further and further away, the gloom drew closer. Kaladin was able to reach the nearby gem and suck in some Stormlight, albeit a very small amount. Syl worried about Kaladin and started to grow distant."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content='Kaladin - Finally, Kaladin was released. As he left his cell,  Kaladin realized Adolin had locked himself up, in protest of Kaladin\'s imprisonment. When Kaladin and Adolin exited the room, Bridge Four was there to greet them, saluting and cheering. Adolin offered a full set of Shards to Kaladin, though he declined, and instead gave them to Moash. As Moash eagerly put on the armor, Rock demanded they all celebrate with a feast, and Bridge Four retreated to their barracks. Kaladin helped put the rest of Moash\'s armor on and agreed to help "accomplish their task." Moash ran to the sparring grounds to practice with Shardplate, and Kaladin rejoined Bridge Four. In the Chasms \nKaladin joined Dalinar, Adolin, and Shallan on a scouting expedition across the Shattered Plains. As they crossed the plateaus, Kaladin noticed Syl\'s absence, and his inability to consume Stormlight. Dalinar talked with Kaladin regarding Renarin\'s inclusion in Bridge Four and how it was affecting him. Then, Kaladin talked to Adolin about a potential attack from Szeth, and how they would defend against him. Eventually, they reached the final scouting plateau, one that has a dead chasmfiend on top. As Adolin, Shallan and Dalinar stood on the mechanical bridge, Kaladin realized a bit too late about the incoming danger. He ran towards the bridge and so did Adolin upon seeing his distress. While the prince was able to reach Dalinar and save him, a carpenter from Sadeas\' camp pulled an emergency lever, which caused the bridge to collapse and sent Kaladin and Shallan to plummet into the chasms. As they fall, Kaladin managed to suck in a small amount of Stormlight, saving his life. Shallan did the same, though neither recongnized the other as Radiant.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content="Kaladin - They wandered the chasms for a while, and begin to argue. Soon, they heard a large scraping noise: a chasmfiend. Shallan began to lure the chasmfiend toward them, so she could get a sketch of a live one, much to Kaladin's dismay. Eventually, they left and continued back towards the warcamps. They bantered for a bit, Kaladin assuming Shallan's life was easy and pampered. Shallan responded saying that her father was abusive, and that her life was far from easy. Syl had failed to reappear and had not responded to Kaladin's pleas. Soon, they heard a chasmfiend again, and they hid in a small fissure to escape it."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content="Kaladin - The chasmfiend swiped at them, but was unable to hit them. Kaladin planned to fight it, but Shallan, desperate for a way to escape, gave him her Shardblade to fight with. Kaladin jumped out of the fissure and they both distracted the chasmfiend, Shallan with Lightweavings and Kaladin with a Shardblade. The chasmfiend managed to bite Kaladin in the leg, severely weakening him, though as it came for another attack, Kaladin stabbed it in the roof of it's mouth with the Shardblade, finally killing it. As the highstorm approached, the pair grew gloomy at their imminent death. Kaladin realized they could use Shallan's Blade to cut a cubby out of the chasm wall, which would provide them protection from the storm. Shallan climbed upon the chasmfiend's back and started cutting handholds upward towards the water line. Finally, she finished, and started helping Kaladin climb up, as his leg was weakened."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Kholin's Bodyguard (1173-1174)", 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bd85836d-f05e-4739-8b58-75908bc55826'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin barely reached the cubby as the stormwall hit. Kaladin received a vision from the Stormfather, in which he was told he had betrayed Syl, killing her. When the storm ended, the pair found their way back to the warcamps, with Bridge Four there to meet them. Dalinar soon came, and Kaladin saluted him, despite his leg. Dalinar tells everyone to meet the needs of Kaladin, as he was a hero for bringing back Shallan.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Rebuilding the Army', 'order': 40, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a71d1005-8c56-42e2-8528-c946ecf3c316'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Rebuilding the Army \nAfter the massive casualties at the Battle of the Tower, Kaladin was tasked with turning the remaining bridgemen into a standing army. He promoted Teft, Moash, Skar, Rock and Sigzil to lieutenants, a rank between captain and sergeant, to form a command structure for a thousand men. More specifically, Kaladin named Rock quartermaster, with Lopen as his second, and appointed Sigzil to be their clerk as he was the only one who could read glyphs. He put Teft in charge of training, suggesting that he combine the remaining bridgemen into twenty crews and train two members in each to go back and train the others. Kaladin promised a few men to assist Teft, but explained that would have to do as most of Bridge Four, including Moash and Skar, would be needed to keep Dalinar alive. Without the highprince, Kaladin feared that the bridgemen would just be sold back to Torol Sadeas by his successor. With word spreading that the emperor of Azir was dead at the hands of the Assassin in White, Kaladin reminded Teft that the assassin had already killed Gavilar and they just had to hope he was done.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Rebuilding the Army', 'order': 40, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a71d1005-8c56-42e2-8528-c946ecf3c316'}, page_content='Kaladin - Regardless, they had to protect Dalinar at all costs.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Freedom, Bridge Four', 'order': 41, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7db2e673-8377-4f82-8dea-fcf173c0aa8a'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Freedom, Bridge Four \nOnce in agreement, they rounded up the rest of the men in Bridge Four and went to get their slave brands covered with tattoos. Hobber sat down first, with each man following, receiving tattoos that said “Freedom, Bridge Four.” Sitting down last, Kaladin closed his eyes and waited for the tattooist to finish. She cursed, revealing that the tattoo ink wouldn’t take. Kaladin sighed, realizing he was unconsciously holding Stormlight in his veins. He banished the Stormlight and she tried again, the ink taking this time. He looked in the mirror, seeing his slave brands covered up for a moment. Syl landed on his shoulder and he unconsciously sucked in Stormlight which melted the tattoo. The tattooist cursed again and picked up her rag, preparing to try again.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Freedom, Bridge Four', 'order': 41, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7db2e673-8377-4f82-8dea-fcf173c0aa8a'}, page_content='Kaladin - However, Kaladin insisted that it was fine and tossed a small bag of spheres to the tattooist. Upon Bridge Four’s return to the barracks, Rind was waiting for them with their new Cobalt Guard uniforms. While the men eagerly tried on their uniforms, Teft hesitated, unsure if he deserved to wear something like this again. Kaladin objected, saying the uniform was what he was and not to let the slave rule him. Teft countered, asking Kaladin when he was going to admit he was doing the same thing. Teft tried to convince him that he needed to show Dalinar that he was a Surgebinder and a lighteyes. However, Kaladin confessed that he had everything taken away from him by the lighteyes and for now, he couldn’t let them take this too. Dropping the subject, Teft put on his uniform and joined the others. With the uniforms sorted out, the men cut off the insignia of the Cobalt Guard, declaring themselves Bridge Four.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Becoming What Dalinar Needs', 'order': 42, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ec2d84c0-d8eb-4e0f-8153-68d2460878d7'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Becoming What Dalinar Needs \nKaladin set up rotations to protect Dalinar, always assigning himself, Moash, or Skar for the Blackthorn. After a small council, Dalinar wished for Kaladin and his best men to take on more duties extending to protecting Navani, his sons and eventually King Elhokar himself. Dalinar confessed that there may have already been an attempt on the king’s life when the gemstones on his Shardplate seemed to be sabotaged. Unsure of who to trust, Dalinar asked Kaladin to familiarize himself with how the King’s Guard works and to learn from them. Once their training was complete, Kaladin would be in charge of a new group guarding the king consisting of some of the old King’s Guard and Kaladin’s own men. Kaladin worried that his men were stretched thin, but Dalinar said he was not alone in that problem. During a trip to the chasms, Kaladin asked Syl what she thought about Dalinar’s plan to reform the Knights Radiant. She exclaimed that not only was it a wonderful idea, but she was jealous that he thought of it first. He then asked her if a spren could be writing the glyphs on the wall. While she didn’t know, Syl admitted that she had seen a spren like red lightning, a dangerous spren. Kaladin asked Syl if there were more like him. Though she expected the question, she didn’t answer him at first. She eventually told him that there were others like him as spren, those she didn’t know, tried to reclaim what was lost. Syl goes on to say that Kaladin has to become what Dalinar is looking for and not to make him search in vain. While in the chasms, Sigzil conducted some baseline tests of Kaladin’s Surgebinding abilities with Rock and Lopen’s assistance. They had to rely on counting as Sigzil didn’t have a proper clock to time Kaladin, nor did he even know how to measure Stormlight. Kaladin suggested that they use chips since they were weighed before being encased in glass. However, Sigzil worried that he was wasting Kaladin’s time as there was still so much about Stormlight that they didn’t know.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Becoming What Dalinar Needs', 'order': 42, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ec2d84c0-d8eb-4e0f-8153-68d2460878d7'}, page_content='Kaladin - Lopen reassured him that it wasn’t a waste and asked if Kaladin could stick him to the wall.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Becoming What Dalinar Needs', 'order': 42, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ec2d84c0-d8eb-4e0f-8153-68d2460878d7'}, page_content='Kaladin - Able to do so, Rock commented that this skill could be very useful in battle. They continued to experiment further with his new abilities, the others taking up spears to test him. Just like with his spear, Kaladin knew these new abilities would take lots of practice. This meant Kaladin would have to find a new person like himself to spar with. Calling it a day, the men returned to the warcamp and to the news that a hero had come to the Shattered Plains. Kaladin’s heart became ice when he heard the hero was none other than Highlord Amaram, the man who stole Kaladin’s Shardblade and branded him a slave.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Preparing for the Assassin in White', 'order': 43, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0e246e43-af3f-475b-9a83-098446cc3780'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Preparing for the Assassin in White \nKaladin led a patrol through the Lighteyes' training grounds with Moash and Drehy, to guard Adolin and Renarin. Syl encouraged Kaladin to tell Dalinar about Amaram, but he refused, thinking he wouldn't be believed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Preparing for the Assassin in White', 'order': 43, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0e246e43-af3f-475b-9a83-098446cc3780'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin talked with Zahel, an ex-soldier ardent, but was left alone soon after. Kaladin asked Syl if she found Zahel weird, and she replied saying all humans other than Rock seemed weird. Later, Kaladin watched Zahel train Renarin. Zahel was having Renarin jump off the roof of the grounds to practice being comfortable with Shardplate's strength. Kaladin mocked Renarin's clumsiness, but Zahel countered, saying Renarin had a good attitude about it. Zahel offered Kaladin the chance to train under him, but Kaladin declined. Kaladin participated in a mock duel with Zahel, who used a blunted Shardblade. Kaladin lost, but Zahel believed Kaladin could have given someone enough time to escape in a real fight. Adolin, who had been practicing further away, insulted Kaladin, which angered him. Kaladin charged at Adolin in a fit of rage, but was quickly defeated, as Adolin was wearing Shardplate. Zahel berated the prince for his carelessness. Kaladin used Stormlight to heal himself, and ran at Adolin again, only to lose his strength and collapse. Zahel commended Kaladin for his quick thinking, but claimed it would not be enough against a Shardbearer. Kaladin asked Syl why his energy suddenly dissapeared, and she responded, saying he was not protecting anyone while attacking Adolin. During each highstorm, Kaladin gathered all those who were under his protection in one location to make it easier to keep them safe. However, he blamed himself when the countdown to the Everstorm continued to appear. After a particular highstorm, King Elhokar was nearly killed after the railing of the balcony he was standing on broke free. Kaladin and Dalinar concluded that the support was cut with a Shardblade and that it was an assassination attempt. Later, Kaladin approached Dalinar and told him about Amaram's betrayal and Kaladin's branding. Dalinar was doubtful, believing Amaram to be an honorable man, but agreed to look into it. This angered Kaladin, leaving him unsatisfied with Dalinar’s promise. Kaladin figured he'd take matters into his own hands, but Syl countered, saying Kaladin was not a Skybreaker and was worrying her. Soon after, Dalinar requested that Kaladin and his men learn how to ride horses, as they might be useful in the future. The groom thought it was absurd for darkeyes to learn horseback riding, but she taught them anyways. Kaladin was hesitant to learn at first, but he did so anyway, at the wishes of Dalinar. At first, he rode an old, mellow horse named Spray, until Adolin rode by and taunted him for not riding a fast horse. He jokingly told Kaladin he should ride Dreamstorm, a wild and violent horse. Kaladin decided to do so, and mounted the horse. As it bucked him wildly, he was forced to lash himself to the saddle using Adhesion, lest he get flung off. He was whipped around, until he finally ran out of Stormlight, flinging him several feet in the air and landing across the stable."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Preparing for the Assassin in White', 'order': 43, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0e246e43-af3f-475b-9a83-098446cc3780'}, page_content="Kaladin - The attempt impressed Adolin, so he apologized for taunting him. Kaladin talked with Natam about the assassination attempt, and who was on the balcony. Natam told Kaladin that the only person on the balcony after the storm was Moash, before riding away. The next highstorm, Kaladin had a dream in which the Stormfather visited him. The Stormfather said that Kaladin would soon betray Syl, thereby killing her. When he woke up, Syl told him that something was wrong, and that The One Who Hates was coming. Kaladin, trusting Syl's word, entered Dalinar's room and warned the of the impending danger. Dalinar trusted Kaladin's instincts, so he retrieved the king and they all fled from the palace. Hobber and Beld scouted ahead, while Moash and Elinor stayed by Elhokar. As they ran, they came to a dark hallway with the spheres drained and a large cut in the wall."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Preparing for the Assassin in White', 'order': 43, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0e246e43-af3f-475b-9a83-098446cc3780'}, page_content="Kaladin - Szeth appeared from the darkness shortly after. Kaladin, Dalinar, and Adolin fought Szeth, while Renarin and other Bridge Four members escorted the king out of the palace. Eventually, Adolin was defeated and Kaladin's arm was severed by Szeth's Honorblade. This left Dalinar to fend for himself. As Dalinar fought Szeth, Kaladin arrived and pushed both him and Szeth through the hole in wall, and they tumbled to the ground. As they fell to the ground, Kaladin consumed Stormlight from Szeth's reserves, which allowed him to heal himself from the fall. Szeth was shocked at Kaladin's survival, and denied the return of the Knights Radiant. He fled after he saw Kaladin heal his arm, and Kaladin collapes from exhaustion. Kaladin soon woke up and reentered the palace, searching for any dead or injured. He found Dalinar and the others resting and tending to any wounded. Dalinar expressed his surprise at Kaladin's survival, and Kaladin lied, saying he lived due to Szeth's abilities. Kaladin left to search for his men, and found Beld's dead body, along with Hobber, who had lost his legs from Szeth's blade. Upon seeing he could barely defend against a Shardbearer, Kaladin visited Zahel and asked if he could train under him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Training Continues', 'order': 44, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '64625558-a47b-4844-b4ae-dba1b468894e'}, page_content="Kaladin - Training Continues\nKaladin continued to lead training of the bridge crews, and assigned Teft to train Bridge Seventeen in the chasms. Kaladin wanted to defeat Szeth, now that the bridgemen were mostly safe. While he surveyed training, Kaladin met with Sigzil, Rock, and Lopen, to further discuss Kaladin's abilities. After many attempts, Kaladin fianlly Lashed himself to the chasm wall. Kaladin experimented a little, before he and the others returned to the barracks. They were met with a tense dinner gathering. Renarin Kholin had come to the fire, and asked Kaladin if he could join Bridge Four. Kaladin allowed him to join, albeit with discomfort at letting a lighteyes join their ranks."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Training Continues', 'order': 44, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '64625558-a47b-4844-b4ae-dba1b468894e'}, page_content='Kaladin - Moash, Teft, and a few other bridgmen requested Kaladin go out with them to get drinks, but Kaladin declined the offer, and got some stew. After accepting Zahel\'s offer to train, Kaladin, Teft, Moash, and Yake visited the training grounds. Zahel had them each practice with one of the King\'s blades to get comfortable with the sight at one. They also practiced basic sword stances, which would allow them to better attack and defend against a Shardbearer. While taking a break, Kaladin noticed Shallan enter, who had come to update the Shardblade and Plate record. He walked with Adolin towards her, and they shared some banter. Kaladin returned to the water barrel, and Moash arrived shortly after. They discussed the reason for Moash\'s hatred towards the King, and Kaladin agreed to meet with the Moash\'s partners. He talked with Syl about what was right, and mentioned Dalinar\'s maneuver when fighting Szeth to Zahel, a lastclap, before training some more with the other men. Kaladin surveyed some of the bridge crews one night, before Syl convinced him to relax a litle and get some stew. He made his way back to Bridge Four\'s barracks, and was met with two Herdazians: Lopen\'s "cousins." Kaladin found Shen stacking bags of grain in the storage room, and Kaladin apologized for being hesitant to arm Shen. He handed a spear to Shen, before being called out by Moash. Upon Moash\'s prompting, Kaladin agreed to get drinks with some of the bridgemen. When they arrived, Peet got them a table and Rock told the story of his people. Eventually, Moash took Kaladin aside, and they met with Graves and some others, including Danlan, a women Adolin had previously courted. Graves asked Kaladin to consider assisting them on their mission to assassinate Elhokar, and Kaladin hesitantly agreed, to Syl\'s dismay. As they left the room, Kaladin forbid Moash from talking or meeting with Graves and the others again. One night, Kaladin strolled along the Shattered Plains, looking for the place at which he met Wit, months before. Upon reaching the desired location, Kaladin stepped off the edge, plummeting into the chasm. After sucking in Stormlight to assist with the landing, he took off in a jog and practiced Lashing himself to the walls of the chasm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Training Continues', 'order': 44, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '64625558-a47b-4844-b4ae-dba1b468894e'}, page_content="Kaladin - After some time, he was able to do so without stumbling, and was soon able to repeatadly Lash himself quicker and more accurately. He threw caution aside and Lashed himself upward, towards the sky, and experienced true freedom and triumph for the first time after Tien's death. Soon, he was hurtling past chasms and plataues at incredible speeds. Kaladin Lashed himself higher and higher, before reluctantly returning to the ground, fearing he would run out of Stormlight. He conversed with Syl for a moment, before he retured to the warcamps. But rather than returning to Dalinar's camp, he traveled to Sadeas', realizing he could kill Amaram right then and there. Syl pleaded for him not to and reminded Kaladin of the experience he just had."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Training Continues', 'order': 44, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '64625558-a47b-4844-b4ae-dba1b468894e'}, page_content="Kaladin - Intent on not tainting the memory, Kaladin returned to  Dalinar's camp. Upon returning, he encountered Shen, who said he needed to leave, and gave Kaladin his real name: Rlain. He then departed. Adolin was guarded under Kaladin on the day he was supposed to meet with Shallan. As the pair made their way to the carriage, Kaladin realized the driver was none other than Wit. As the carriage moved along, Kaladin spoke with Wit, who revealed he knew about Kaladin's abilities. When they arrived at Sebarial's camp, Shallan hugged Wit, to everyone's surprise. Kaladin accompanied the couple to a menagerie in the Outer Market. On the way there, he rode in the carriage with Adolin and Shallan, as he was suspicious of her. Upon their arrival at the menagerie, Kaladin realized Wit was gone, replaced with one of Adolin's servants. Kaladin talked with Syl and walked with Adolin and Shallan as they observed the animals. Soon, Dalinar arrived, accompanied by Amaram, who was wearing a strange cloak. Dalinar then announced that the Knights Radiant had been reestablished, with Amaram at their head."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Adolin's Duel", 'order': 45, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '361b7131-b358-4a76-a1f8-4e3fb0521173'}, page_content="Kaladin - Adolin's Duel\n\nDuring Adolin's duel against Relis Ruthar, Elit Ruthar, Abrobadar, and Jakamav, Kaladin guarded Dalinar and Elhokar while they watched the duel. After seeing Renarin enter the arena and quickly fall to the ground, Kaladin proclaimed honor dead, and asked Dalinar to take care of his men if things went poorly, before jumping into the arena to help Adolin. As he entered the arena, Syl promised this would be different than when Kaladin defended Amaram. Relis ignored Kaladin at first, but quickly realized his opponents' skill. Kaladin regrouped with Adolin and told him to focus on breaking their opponents Shardplate. Adolin requested Kaladin watch out for Renarin, who was very vulnerable. Kaladin drew Relis' attention while Adolin fought Elit and Jakamav. Relis dueled Kaladin for a short time, but then returned to fight Adolin. Kaladin used a lashing-enhanced kick to knock Relis down, breaking his own legs in process, though he was able to heal them using Stormlight. Kaladin noticed that he cracked some of Relis' shards with his kick. Adolin's own armor was mostly cracked, though he managed to land a strong blow on Elit's chest plate, cracking it and slowing Elit greatly, giving Kaladin the chance to force Elit to yield. The remaining three opponents gathered to battle Adolin, while Renarin sat alone in the sand. Kaladin demanded Elit give him his helm, who complied, and used it as a armored gauntlet, then continued to help Adolin. Relis and Jakamav both tried to attack Kaladin, but he was able to dodge their Shardblades or block them with the helm, until he ran out of Stormlight. At this point, Kaladin realized that he had been feeding it to the Plate in order to keep it from shattering."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Adolin's Duel", 'order': 45, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '361b7131-b358-4a76-a1f8-4e3fb0521173'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin eventually was backed against a wall, until Adolin appeared and grappled Jakamav to the ground. Kaladin noticed that Abrobadar had been defeated by Adolin as well. Relis, the last man standing, rushed toward Renarin, who was vulnerable. Kaladin followed, and yelled for Renarin to yield, however Renarin only dismissed his Blade, and did nothing more. Relis raised his Blade toward Renarin, but ended up swinging it at Kaladin, who then caught it in a lastclap. Relis heard the scream that came from Kaladin holding a Shardblade, and ran from the arena, forfeiting the duel. Jakamav demanded for Adolin to fight him as he was held down. Rather than actually fighting, Kaladin placed his knife in a crack in Jakamav's plate, and told him to yield. Jakamav yielded and Adolin was declared the victor. Adolin laughed joyously at the spoils he won and asked Kaladin to help him remove his drained armor."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Adolin's Duel", 'order': 45, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '361b7131-b358-4a76-a1f8-4e3fb0521173'}, page_content="Kaladin - Elhokar announced how impressed he was by the duel, and offered Adolin a boon. Kaladin noticed Sadeas trying to leave the arena, but before Sadeas could slip away, Adolin demanded the right to duel Sadeas, right then and there. Kaladin, who realized this was his chance to duel Amaram, also demanded the right to challenge him, for his crimes of murder and obstruction of justice, which caused Amaram to cower. Next to Kaladin, Adolin groaned, and the crowd silenced. Elhokar ordered Kaladin to be arrested. After the duel, Dalinar, Elhokar, and Kaladin conversed in Dalinar's rooms. Kaladin sat chained to a seat, while Dalinar and Elhokar argued. Elhokar argued for Kaladin getting punished, Dalinar against. Eventually, they reached a compromise: imprisonment. Elhokar left, and Dalinar berated Kaladin for his actions. Soldiers soon came to take Kaladin, all of them respectful. As he shuffled through the camp, the eyes of soldiers and scribes fell upon him. When Kaladin reached his cell, he promised to never trust a lighteyes ever again."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'In Prison', 'order': 46, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3c629f21-6631-470d-aa9c-88b0bb87f938'}, page_content="Kaladin -  In Prison \nKaladin's prison cell was nicer than most, but he still hated it. He talked with Syl about Dalinar, and said he was just like all the other lighteyes, though he quickly took it back."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'In Prison', 'order': 46, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3c629f21-6631-470d-aa9c-88b0bb87f938'}, page_content='Kaladin - He tried to consume Stormlight from a nearby gem, but failed.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'In Prison', 'order': 46, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3c629f21-6631-470d-aa9c-88b0bb87f938'}, page_content='Kaladin - Soon, Wit entered unannounced, and sat on a bench. He carried a stringed instrument, which he was tuning. Despite Kaladin\'s reluctance, Wit began his story, one of a man named Fleet. In the story, Fleet raced against a highstorm across Roshar. In the end, Fleet reached Shinovar but collapsed and died from exhaustion, leaving his spirit to live in the storms. As Wit told the story, Kaladin interjected between lines, prompting Wit to continue. Kaladin was able to clearly see Fleet and the story being told in his head while his eyes were closed. As the tale came to a close, Wit and Kaladin discussed the origin of stories, before Wit left. Life dragged on in Kaladin\'s cell, though his accommodations were nice. When Dalinar entered the room, Kaladin jumped to attention and saluted him. They spoke about Elhokar and Dalinar\'s attempts to free Kaladin. Dalinar revealed what he knew about Roshone and how he ended up in Hearthstone, much to Kaladin\'s surprise. Dalinar encouraged Kaladin to act better, lest he ruin the reputation Kaladin had built for darkeyes. Upon Dalinar\'s departure, Kaladin contemplated what he would do, eventually coming to the decision that Elhokar had to die. As Kaladin\'s release seemed to seem further and further away, the gloom drew closer. Kaladin was able to reach the nearby gem and suck in some Stormlight, albeit a very small amount. Syl worried about Kaladin and started to grow distant. Finally, Kaladin was released. As he left his cell,  Kaladin realized Adolin had locked himself up, in protest of Kaladin\'s imprisonment. When Kaladin and Adolin exited the room, Bridge Four was there to greet them, saluting and cheering. Adolin offered a full set of Shards to Kaladin, though he declined, and instead gave them to Moash. As Moash eagerly put on the armor, Rock demanded they all celebrate with a feast, and Bridge Four retreated to their barracks. Kaladin helped put the rest of Moash\'s armor on and agreed to help "accomplish their task." Moash ran to the sparring grounds to practice with Shardplate, and Kaladin rejoined Bridge Four.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'In the Chasms', 'order': 47, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d346659-51ae-429c-b20e-1eb537f97dd0'}, page_content="Kaladin -  In the Chasms \nKaladin joined Dalinar, Adolin, and Shallan on a scouting expedition across the Shattered Plains. As they crossed the plateaus, Kaladin noticed Syl's absence, and his inability to consume Stormlight. Dalinar talked with Kaladin regarding Renarin's inclusion in Bridge Four and how it was affecting him. Then, Kaladin talked to Adolin about a potential attack from Szeth, and how they would defend against him. Eventually, they reached the final scouting plateau, one that has a dead chasmfiend on top. As Adolin, Shallan and Dalinar stood on the mechanical bridge, Kaladin realized a bit too late about the incoming danger. He ran towards the bridge and so did Adolin upon seeing his distress. While the prince was able to reach Dalinar and save him, a carpenter from Sadeas' camp pulled an emergency lever, which caused the bridge to collapse and sent Kaladin and Shallan to plummet into the chasms. As they fall, Kaladin managed to suck in a small amount of Stormlight, saving his life. Shallan did the same, though neither recongnized the other as Radiant. They wandered the chasms for a while, and begin to argue. Soon, they heard a large scraping noise: a chasmfiend. Shallan began to lure the chasmfiend toward them, so she could get a sketch of a live one, much to Kaladin's dismay. Eventually, they left and continued back towards the warcamps. They bantered for a bit, Kaladin assuming Shallan's life was easy and pampered. Shallan responded saying that her father was abusive, and that her life was far from easy. Syl had failed to reappear and had not responded to Kaladin's pleas. Soon, they heard a chasmfiend again, and they hid in a small fissure to escape it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'In the Chasms', 'order': 47, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d346659-51ae-429c-b20e-1eb537f97dd0'}, page_content="Kaladin - The chasmfiend swiped at them, but was unable to hit them. Kaladin planned to fight it, but Shallan, desperate for a way to escape, gave him her Shardblade to fight with. Kaladin jumped out of the fissure and they both distracted the chasmfiend, Shallan with Lightweavings and Kaladin with a Shardblade. The chasmfiend managed to bite Kaladin in the leg, severely weakening him, though as it came for another attack, Kaladin stabbed it in the roof of it's mouth with the Shardblade, finally killing it. As the highstorm approached, the pair grew gloomy at their imminent death. Kaladin realized they could use Shallan's Blade to cut a cubby out of the chasm wall, which would provide them protection from the storm. Shallan climbed upon the chasmfiend's back and started cutting handholds upward towards the water line. Finally, she finished, and started helping Kaladin climb up, as his leg was weakened."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'In the Chasms', 'order': 47, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d346659-51ae-429c-b20e-1eb537f97dd0'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin barely reached the cubby as the stormwall hit. Kaladin received a vision from the Stormfather, in which he was told he had betrayed Syl, killing her. When the storm ended, the pair found their way back to the warcamps, with Bridge Four there to meet them. Dalinar soon came, and Kaladin saluted him, despite his leg. Dalinar tells everyone to meet the needs of Kaladin, as he was a hero for bringing back Shallan.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Third Ideal (1174)', 'order': 48, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2c014062-4489-4d2b-9d26-8daf6ed0dee9'}, page_content='Kaladin -  The Third Ideal (1174) \n Saving Elhokar \n\nAfter his return from the chasms, Kaladin stayed at the warcamps to heal, as Syl had disappeared. He went to the starting plateau to see Bridge Four off on the expedition to the center of the Shattered Plains.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Third Ideal (1174)', 'order': 48, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2c014062-4489-4d2b-9d26-8daf6ed0dee9'}, page_content="Kaladin - Dalinar noticed Kaladin, and asked Amaram, who was nearby, to come speak with him. Dalinar confronts Amaram about the rumors about him. Amaram confessed as Dalinar placed his Shardblade at Amaram's throat. Dalinar told him to take off his Radiant cloak, and lets him go, despite Kaladin's protest."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Third Ideal (1174)', 'order': 48, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2c014062-4489-4d2b-9d26-8daf6ed0dee9'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin thanked Dalinar, and left to go rest. With the Weeping underway, Kaladin felt the darkness return. Moash visited him and went over the plan to assassinate Elhokar. Kaladin walked through the empty camp, and tried to put his losses behind him. When he returned to his barracks, he found Elhokar there, and they conversed about Elhokar's confidence as king. Elhokar mentioned that Kaladin felt special, and that the shadows that haunted him vanished when he was near. He apologized for imprisoning Kaladin, then left. Later, Kaladin walked throught the lighteyes' sparring grounds, and talked to Zahel. He asked about Wit, and tried practicing with a spear; even though his leg was weakened. Kaladin then came to the realization that Elhokar is Dalinar's Tien, before quickly making his way to the palace. When Kaladin returned to the palace, he found no guards, worrying him further. When he entered the king's room, he found Elhokar lying on a couch, unmoving. Kaladin realized quickly after that the king was drunk, not incapacitated. He said that assassins were coming and that they needed to leave. As they do, one of Graves' men appeared and stabbed Elhokar in the side, before Kaladin stabbed the man with his spear. As they fled, Moash and Graves appeared, both in Shardplate. Kaladin argued with Moash about what was right, and Moash readied himself to fight. Moash attacked Kaladin, and Kaladin fell to the ground. Graves and Moash attempted to make it look like Szeth attacked, and Kaladin heard an argument between Syl and the Stormfather. Kaladin stood, though with great difficulty, and placed himself in front of Elhokar. He then said the third ideal of the Windrunners, at Syl's direction. Syl finally returned to Kaladin, in the form of a Shardblade. He sucked in Stormlight and healed himself, exploding with power, which caused Graves and Moash to flee. However, before fully retreating, Graves ranted over the fact that he had focused on making certain Kaladin was separated from Dalinar. Syl then warned Kaladin that something was very wrong. Fighting Szeth \n\nWhile Dalinar and the others were fighting the Parshendi, Kaladin plummeted towards the Shattered Plains, rejuvenated with power. Szeth, who had come to kill Dalinar, reacted in horror at Kaladin's arrival. Bridge Four tossed infused gems to Kaladin, prompting him to attack Szeth, seeking revenge for the fallen bridgemen. As Kaladin and Szeth clashed in the skies, the two storms raged below. Kaladin wondered why a highstorm had come, and Syl answered, saying the Parshendi had summoned it. Syl became a spear to help Kaladin better parry Szeth's blows, who was denying the return of the Radiants. Kaladin fought Szeth expertly, using different forms of Syl to defend and attack. Because of the hightstorm below, Kaladin's gemstones were renewed with Stormlight. After fighting for some time, Szeth returned to the ground to kill Dalinar, and Kaladin followed. Upon landing, the pair found an empty plateau, with no signs of activity. Szeth realized that the armies had used the Oathgate and traveled to Urithiru, and flew off to the west, with Kaladin in pursuit. Kaladin managed to stab Szeth in the foot, and then hit Szeth in the shoulder. Szeth finally acknowledged the truth, realizing he was never Truthless. Szeth stopped, and Kaladin went for a killing blow, but sliced Szeth's wrist instead, causing him to drop his Honorblade. Without the Blade, Szeth plummeted into the storms and chasms below. Kaladin grabbed the Blade out of the sky, and gave Syl and compliment."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Third Ideal (1174)', 'order': 48, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2c014062-4489-4d2b-9d26-8daf6ed0dee9'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin returned to the ground, and found some of Bridge Four there, before using the Oathgate to transport them to Urithiru. Kaladin met with Dalinar, Renarin, and Shallan, with Renarin revealing that he was a Truthwatcher and Dalinar revealing he was a Bondsmith and had bonded with the Stormfather. Kaladin decided he would return to Hearthstone, to reunite with his parents and save them from Roshone.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Saving Elhokar', 'order': 49, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fc3fd8da-2c36-410c-956d-8853a4347f1a'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Saving Elhokar \n\nAfter his return from the chasms, Kaladin stayed at the warcamps to heal, as Syl had disappeared. He went to the starting plateau to see Bridge Four off on the expedition to the center of the Shattered Plains.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Saving Elhokar', 'order': 49, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fc3fd8da-2c36-410c-956d-8853a4347f1a'}, page_content="Kaladin - Dalinar noticed Kaladin, and asked Amaram, who was nearby, to come speak with him. Dalinar confronts Amaram about the rumors about him. Amaram confessed as Dalinar placed his Shardblade at Amaram's throat. Dalinar told him to take off his Radiant cloak, and lets him go, despite Kaladin's protest."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Saving Elhokar', 'order': 49, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fc3fd8da-2c36-410c-956d-8853a4347f1a'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin thanked Dalinar, and left to go rest. With the Weeping underway, Kaladin felt the darkness return. Moash visited him and went over the plan to assassinate Elhokar. Kaladin walked through the empty camp, and tried to put his losses behind him. When he returned to his barracks, he found Elhokar there, and they conversed about Elhokar's confidence as king. Elhokar mentioned that Kaladin felt special, and that the shadows that haunted him vanished when he was near. He apologized for imprisoning Kaladin, then left. Later, Kaladin walked throught the lighteyes' sparring grounds, and talked to Zahel. He asked about Wit, and tried practicing with a spear; even though his leg was weakened. Kaladin then came to the realization that Elhokar is Dalinar's Tien, before quickly making his way to the palace. When Kaladin returned to the palace, he found no guards, worrying him further. When he entered the king's room, he found Elhokar lying on a couch, unmoving. Kaladin realized quickly after that the king was drunk, not incapacitated. He said that assassins were coming and that they needed to leave. As they do, one of Graves' men appeared and stabbed Elhokar in the side, before Kaladin stabbed the man with his spear. As they fled, Moash and Graves appeared, both in Shardplate. Kaladin argued with Moash about what was right, and Moash readied himself to fight. Moash attacked Kaladin, and Kaladin fell to the ground. Graves and Moash attempted to make it look like Szeth attacked, and Kaladin heard an argument between Syl and the Stormfather. Kaladin stood, though with great difficulty, and placed himself in front of Elhokar. He then said the third ideal of the Windrunners, at Syl's direction. Syl finally returned to Kaladin, in the form of a Shardblade. He sucked in Stormlight and healed himself, exploding with power, which caused Graves and Moash to flee. However, before fully retreating, Graves ranted over the fact that he had focused on making certain Kaladin was separated from Dalinar. Syl then warned Kaladin that something was very wrong."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Fighting Szeth', 'order': 50, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c7e22764-542b-407d-ab9d-fb1742e42bd0'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Fighting Szeth \n\nWhile Dalinar and the others were fighting the Parshendi, Kaladin plummeted towards the Shattered Plains, rejuvenated with power. Szeth, who had come to kill Dalinar, reacted in horror at Kaladin's arrival. Bridge Four tossed infused gems to Kaladin, prompting him to attack Szeth, seeking revenge for the fallen bridgemen. As Kaladin and Szeth clashed in the skies, the two storms raged below. Kaladin wondered why a highstorm had come, and Syl answered, saying the Parshendi had summoned it. Syl became a spear to help Kaladin better parry Szeth's blows, who was denying the return of the Radiants. Kaladin fought Szeth expertly, using different forms of Syl to defend and attack. Because of the hightstorm below, Kaladin's gemstones were renewed with Stormlight. After fighting for some time, Szeth returned to the ground to kill Dalinar, and Kaladin followed. Upon landing, the pair found an empty plateau, with no signs of activity. Szeth realized that the armies had used the Oathgate and traveled to Urithiru, and flew off to the west, with Kaladin in pursuit. Kaladin managed to stab Szeth in the foot, and then hit Szeth in the shoulder. Szeth finally acknowledged the truth, realizing he was never Truthless. Szeth stopped, and Kaladin went for a killing blow, but sliced Szeth's wrist instead, causing him to drop his Honorblade. Without the Blade, Szeth plummeted into the storms and chasms below. Kaladin grabbed the Blade out of the sky, and gave Syl and compliment."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Fighting Szeth', 'order': 50, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c7e22764-542b-407d-ab9d-fb1742e42bd0'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin returned to the ground, and found some of Bridge Four there, before using the Oathgate to transport them to Urithiru. Kaladin met with Dalinar, Renarin, and Shallan, with Renarin revealing that he was a Truthwatcher and Dalinar revealing he was a Bondsmith and had bonded with the Stormfather. Kaladin decided he would return to Hearthstone, to reunite with his parents and save them from Roshone.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Return to Alethkar (1174)', 'order': 51, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ffc045e9-f602-4f0c-9771-9fa638c3677a'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Return to Alethkar (1174) \n Returning to Hearthstone \n\nKaladin traveled to Hearthstone to warn his parents about the approaching Everstorm, doing what he could to prepare other villages and towns as he went. However, he was too late as the Everstorm had already struck.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Return to Alethkar (1174)', 'order': 51, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ffc045e9-f602-4f0c-9771-9fa638c3677a'}, page_content='Kaladin - Walking through the destruction, Kaladin was surprised to find light emanating from the manor house. Entering the house, Kaladin was stopped by one of Roshone\'s soldiers. The guard led Kaladin through the manor where the sounds of wounded led Kaladin to a makeshift triage room. There, he found his father, Lirin, and his mother, Hesina, attending to the wounded. After an emotional reunion, the soldiers insisted that Kaladin be taken to Roshone. Lirin offers to buy his writ of slavery, insisting that they will not take his son, lest they have to find themselves another surgeon. Kaladin observes the wounded, determining they were not signs of battle, but rather of natural disaster. The soldiers sent for Roshone who was surprised to see Kaladin alive and insistent on seeing his brands. Before the conversation went much further, Kaladin punched Roshone for his friend Moash. Kaladin apologizes for his actions and promises not to hit the brightlord again, but rather that they need to talk. Roshone refused at first and insisted that his soldiers attack Kaladin, but they refuse after Kaladin summons Syl. The brightlord tells Kaladin that the parshmen escaped, but they fled instead of attacking the city. Kaladin asks what direction they went, but Roshone\'s soldiers do not know. Kaladin promises to tell Elhokar about the city\'s destroyed food supply. In return, he requests a horse to go hunt the parshmen and tells Roshone that he can\'t stay. He warns the brightlord that he must stand up and lead his people. Laral promises they will do it and arranges for Kaladin to use a spanreed. Kaladin questions whether or not she is truly happy and he is surprised to find she is content with her life in Hearthstone. Kaladin dropped the argument and returned to see his father. Lirin is happy that he returned and is well, but is concerned that he is caught up in war. Kaladin tells him that he is a "watcher at the rim" and must do what he can to protect others.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Return to Alethkar (1174)', 'order': 51, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ffc045e9-f602-4f0c-9771-9fa638c3677a'}, page_content='Kaladin - His father understands and asks him to see his mother before he leaves. On his way, he runs into Laral who has the spanreed set up for Kaladin. He gives an update to Dalinar, who encourages him to find out what the enemy is doing without taking any unnecessary risks. After their conversation, Kaladin goes to see Hesina who introduces him to his new brother, Oroden. Before leaving, Kaladin promises he will come back for Lirin, Hesina, and Oroden, but Lirin insists that he must stay if the Desolation is upon them. He assures them he will return and that Dalinar has refounded the Knights Radiant and this time, they will not fail them.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Returning to Hearthstone', 'order': 52, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff304533-bd3e-4a51-a7c2-20242b8e35db'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Returning to Hearthstone \n\nKaladin traveled to Hearthstone to warn his parents about the approaching Everstorm, doing what he could to prepare other villages and towns as he went. However, he was too late as the Everstorm had already struck. Walking through the destruction, Kaladin was surprised to find light emanating from the manor house. Entering the house, Kaladin was stopped by one of Roshone's soldiers. The guard led Kaladin through the manor where the sounds of wounded led Kaladin to a makeshift triage room. There, he found his father, Lirin, and his mother, Hesina, attending to the wounded. After an emotional reunion, the soldiers insisted that Kaladin be taken to Roshone. Lirin offers to buy his writ of slavery, insisting that they will not take his son, lest they have to find themselves another surgeon. Kaladin observes the wounded, determining they were not signs of battle, but rather of natural disaster."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Returning to Hearthstone', 'order': 52, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff304533-bd3e-4a51-a7c2-20242b8e35db'}, page_content='Kaladin - The soldiers sent for Roshone who was surprised to see Kaladin alive and insistent on seeing his brands. Before the conversation went much further, Kaladin punched Roshone for his friend Moash. Kaladin apologizes for his actions and promises not to hit the brightlord again, but rather that they need to talk. Roshone refused at first and insisted that his soldiers attack Kaladin, but they refuse after Kaladin summons Syl. The brightlord tells Kaladin that the parshmen escaped, but they fled instead of attacking the city. Kaladin asks what direction they went, but Roshone\'s soldiers do not know. Kaladin promises to tell Elhokar about the city\'s destroyed food supply. In return, he requests a horse to go hunt the parshmen and tells Roshone that he can\'t stay. He warns the brightlord that he must stand up and lead his people. Laral promises they will do it and arranges for Kaladin to use a spanreed. Kaladin questions whether or not she is truly happy and he is surprised to find she is content with her life in Hearthstone. Kaladin dropped the argument and returned to see his father. Lirin is happy that he returned and is well, but is concerned that he is caught up in war. Kaladin tells him that he is a "watcher at the rim" and must do what he can to protect others.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Returning to Hearthstone', 'order': 52, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff304533-bd3e-4a51-a7c2-20242b8e35db'}, page_content='Kaladin - His father understands and asks him to see his mother before he leaves. On his way, he runs into Laral who has the spanreed set up for Kaladin. He gives an update to Dalinar, who encourages him to find out what the enemy is doing without taking any unnecessary risks. After their conversation, Kaladin goes to see Hesina who introduces him to his new brother, Oroden. Before leaving, Kaladin promises he will come back for Lirin, Hesina, and Oroden, but Lirin insists that he must stay if the Desolation is upon them. He assures them he will return and that Dalinar has refounded the Knights Radiant and this time, they will not fail them.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Finding the Parshmen ({{Rosharan date|1174}})', 'order': 53, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd117deee-cf09-4915-944a-ff80d3b837c9'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Finding the Parshmen () \n Hornhollow \nUpon his departure from Hearthstone, Kaladin pursued the Voidbringers. After two days, he arrived in the village of Hornhollow.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Finding the Parshmen ({{Rosharan date|1174}})', 'order': 53, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd117deee-cf09-4915-944a-ff80d3b837c9'}, page_content="Kaladin - There, the townspeople had gathered for a town meeting. Syl transformed herself into the shape of a Shardblade and he was welcomed by the crowd. A lighteyed man asked Kaladin if he'd rather rest and eat or attack the rogue parshmen."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Finding the Parshmen ({{Rosharan date|1174}})', 'order': 53, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd117deee-cf09-4915-944a-ff80d3b837c9'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin ordered the man to take him to them. An ardent informs him that the parshmen, about fifty in number and presumably in warform, sought the grain out specifically. Two men were hurt during the attack, Khem and another man. Kaladin then seeks out the citylord who tells him that his scouts know which direction the parshmen went, towards Kholinar. The citylord offers to have his men escort Kaladin, but he departs alone, saying they would only slow him down. Traveling with the Parshmen \nWhen Kaladin finally caught up to the Voidbringers, he was surprised to find they not only were playing cards, but that they looked very different than what he expected. Rather than being red and black marbled like Rlain, the parshmen\'s skin was marbled white and red. They were not wearing warform, nor did they have red eyes. Kaladin observed them for awhile and tells Syl they had been wrong. These parshmen weren\'t the destroyers they had been told about. One of their number noticed him, sounding the alarm. As they took up their cudgels, Kaladin hesitated. Though he knew he could easily defeat them, it didn\'t sit right, so he surrendered instead. The parshmen bound Kaladin to a tree while they debated what to do with him. Against Khen\'s wishes, they didn\'t kill him, but yet pulled him by a rope as they traveled. Kaladin talked up Sah, his captor, explaining card game strategies to him. As they walked, Kaladin realized that the parshmen weren\'t monsters, they were just slaves, like him. Sah argued that Kaladin couldn\'t possibly understand what they had been through, but Kaladin felt he did understand a little. Continuing on, Syl panicked, worried that the parshmen could see her or at least the spren could. Syl explained that the spren leading the parshmen must be from him, a Voidspren. Syl stayed close to Kaladin, just in case he needed to summon her. Kaladin eventually spoke up, complimenting the parshmen and offering them assistance in their travels. Sah refuses and they continue their pace until they stop for a break. Sah\'s little girl, Vai, brings Kaladin some water and she asks him why his people won\'t leave them alone. He struggles to figure out how to explain the war and her ancestors to a seven-year-old. She retreats as the parshmen make camp and Kaladin asks Syl to help cut his rope. Rather than summoning her as a Blade, he dropped a rock alerting the parshmen to his freedom. He asked for his knife so he can build a fire and after a short conference, they allowed him to do just that. Over the next few days, Kaladin spent his time showing the parshmen how to cook food, bind wounds, and build equipment. Sah becomes frustrated though that he needs Kaladin\'s help at all, that he fled one master just to have to listen to him explain things that he should already know. Kaladin explained that "freedom" is a strange word and that despite serving another brightlord, he feels more free now than ever. Once Sah finished the hatchet, he asked Kaladin why he isn\'t afraid to show them these things. Kaladin explained that he has a choice and that it doesn\'t have to come to war. Despite his own words, Kaladin fears that the war is inevitable, so Syl encourages him to find the middle ground. Revolar \nKaladin secured a private storm bunker for the growing group of parshmen in the Vamah city of Revolar after Syl warned him of an approaching highstorm. Khen was pleased with Kaladin\'s work and the group hunkered down for the storm. While it raged outside and Kaladin debated how much longer he could delay returning to Urithiru, the yellow Voidspren appeared beside him. Kaladin told her he could see her and she replied that she wanted him to. She asked Kaladin why he was still there and after a lie, he admitted that the world is changing and he wanted to see which way it went. She asked Kaladin if he would fight for them and he questioned if he would be allowed. She admitted that the final decision isn\'t with her, as she is just a messenger, but that he will find out once they reach their destination. She finally asked Kaladin how he knew of the approaching highstorm. He said he felt it in his bones and she said humans can\'t feel storms.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Finding the Parshmen ({{Rosharan date|1174}})', 'order': 53, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd117deee-cf09-4915-944a-ff80d3b837c9'}, page_content="Kaladin - She gave him a knowing smile and then disappeared. While in Revolar, the number of parshmen camping around the city continued to grow exponentially reaching at least 40,000-50,000 in number. Sah told Kaladin that the number was amazing, that he always imagined the parshmen having their own city and now they do. As they walked through the city, Kaladin saw not only signs of the Everstorm, but also of looting. He asked Sah is this what he wanted, to conquer a kingdom and destroy humankind. Sah confessed that he didn't know, but that he couldn't be a slave again. Kaladin countered that they are his people and that a war to exterminate one side or the other can't be the answer. Sah offered that maybe it doesn't have to be that way, but that he could fight alongside them in something bigger, oppressed against the oppressors. Once he passed where Syl was, she told him that there are a lot of yellow spren around and another highstorm is coming. As Khen's group approached the Parshendi leaders of the small town, the scribe evaluated them and asked about Kaladin's presence. Yixli spoke highly of him, but the scribe said that the Fused would have to label him free. He stepped out of line and saw a tall parshwoman with red eyes, like those of the Shattered Plains. Seeing the Fused, Kaladin knew it was time to go. He sucked in the Stormlight from Khen's pouch and took the pouch from her. He thanked Khen for her kindness, warned her of the impending storm, and said that no matter what she is told, he didn't wish to be her enemy."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Finding the Parshmen ({{Rosharan date|1174}})', 'order': 53, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd117deee-cf09-4915-944a-ff80d3b837c9'}, page_content="Kaladin - He launched himself into the air as the Fused began to scream. Once in the air, Kaladin looked over the scores of parshmen and he told Syl he can't help but feel a kinship to them. She argued that they're Voidbringers and they conquered the city, but Kaladin explained that they are people who are angry and have good reason to be."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Finding the Parshmen ({{Rosharan date|1174}})', 'order': 53, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd117deee-cf09-4915-944a-ff80d3b837c9'}, page_content="Kaladin - He reminds her of how he felt about Elhokar, but she countered that he changed his mind. They continue to argue and Kaladin confessed that he just wanted an absolute right on this, not a moral code with exceptions. Kaladin looked down at the city once more and they both realized the parshmen guarding the humans had not done any preparations for the impending storm. Kaladin Lashed himself down to them and shouted warning of the highstorm. They just stared at him, so Kaladin summoned his Blade and warned the people to take refuge wherever they did during the last storms. He charged the parshmen guards to do better and that if they wanted to claim moral superiority over the humans, they have to treat them better than they were treated. During the exchange with the guards, something crashed into Kaladin, tossing him backwards. As they grasped for his throat, Kaladin kicked them off and he Lashed himself into the air. The red-eyed parshman that attacked Kaladin glowed with what looked like dark Stormlight. Another creature appeared and Kaladin Lashed himself straight toward the stormwall. He pleaded with the Stormfather to show mercy and spare the people below. The Stormfather seemed to consider his request, but said it was something that could not be done. Kaladin zoomed to the ground hoping to find the people safe, but it was all for naught. He hit the ground and dropped Syl, seizing a young father, his son, and another woman. He led them to a group of two dozen people and walked with them. Consumed with pain, Kaladin sucked in Stormlight and deflected the storm while the battered people huddled behind him. He provided them with cover, diverting the storm long enough for the people to reach the bunker. Syl was impressed with what he had done, but Kaladin was dissatisfied that it wasn't enough. Kaladin pushed himself out of the stormwall and then rode in front of the storm for a good hour. Syl instructed Kaladin to follow the wind's nudging as the Stormfather's way of apologizing. He allowed the winds to channel him for hours and by the time the storm passed, he found himself outside of Urithiru."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hornhollow', 'order': 54, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd90fbbd5-fac6-415a-90ff-b20765c10a52'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Hornhollow \nUpon his departure from Hearthstone, Kaladin pursued the Voidbringers. After two days, he arrived in the village of Hornhollow.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hornhollow', 'order': 54, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd90fbbd5-fac6-415a-90ff-b20765c10a52'}, page_content="Kaladin - There, the townspeople had gathered for a town meeting. Syl transformed herself into the shape of a Shardblade and he was welcomed by the crowd. A lighteyed man asked Kaladin if he'd rather rest and eat or attack the rogue parshmen. Kaladin ordered the man to take him to them. An ardent informs him that the parshmen, about fifty in number and presumably in warform, sought the grain out specifically. Two men were hurt during the attack, Khem and another man. Kaladin then seeks out the citylord who tells him that his scouts know which direction the parshmen went, towards Kholinar. The citylord offers to have his men escort Kaladin, but he departs alone, saying they would only slow him down."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Traveling with the Parshmen', 'order': 55, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '893ff6e0-962b-4ca5-9431-1b3b52550e79'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Traveling with the Parshmen \nWhen Kaladin finally caught up to the Voidbringers, he was surprised to find they not only were playing cards, but that they looked very different than what he expected. Rather than being red and black marbled like Rlain, the parshmen's skin was marbled white and red. They were not wearing warform, nor did they have red eyes. Kaladin observed them for awhile and tells Syl they had been wrong. These parshmen weren't the destroyers they had been told about. One of their number noticed him, sounding the alarm."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Traveling with the Parshmen', 'order': 55, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '893ff6e0-962b-4ca5-9431-1b3b52550e79'}, page_content="Kaladin - As they took up their cudgels, Kaladin hesitated. Though he knew he could easily defeat them, it didn't sit right, so he surrendered instead. The parshmen bound Kaladin to a tree while they debated what to do with him. Against Khen's wishes, they didn't kill him, but yet pulled him by a rope as they traveled. Kaladin talked up Sah, his captor, explaining card game strategies to him. As they walked, Kaladin realized that the parshmen weren't monsters, they were just slaves, like him. Sah argued that Kaladin couldn't possibly understand what they had been through, but Kaladin felt he did understand a little. Continuing on, Syl panicked, worried that the parshmen could see her or at least the spren could. Syl explained that the spren leading the parshmen must be from him, a Voidspren. Syl stayed close to Kaladin, just in case he needed to summon her. Kaladin eventually spoke up, complimenting the parshmen and offering them assistance in their travels."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Traveling with the Parshmen', 'order': 55, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '893ff6e0-962b-4ca5-9431-1b3b52550e79'}, page_content='Kaladin - Sah refuses and they continue their pace until they stop for a break. Sah\'s little girl, Vai, brings Kaladin some water and she asks him why his people won\'t leave them alone. He struggles to figure out how to explain the war and her ancestors to a seven-year-old. She retreats as the parshmen make camp and Kaladin asks Syl to help cut his rope. Rather than summoning her as a Blade, he dropped a rock alerting the parshmen to his freedom. He asked for his knife so he can build a fire and after a short conference, they allowed him to do just that. Over the next few days, Kaladin spent his time showing the parshmen how to cook food, bind wounds, and build equipment. Sah becomes frustrated though that he needs Kaladin\'s help at all, that he fled one master just to have to listen to him explain things that he should already know. Kaladin explained that "freedom" is a strange word and that despite serving another brightlord, he feels more free now than ever. Once Sah finished the hatchet, he asked Kaladin why he isn\'t afraid to show them these things. Kaladin explained that he has a choice and that it doesn\'t have to come to war. Despite his own words, Kaladin fears that the war is inevitable, so Syl encourages him to find the middle ground.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Revolar', 'order': 56, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '96eb7670-b55b-4d8d-bf8d-ac02ae238c17'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Revolar \nKaladin secured a private storm bunker for the growing group of parshmen in the Vamah city of Revolar after Syl warned him of an approaching highstorm. Khen was pleased with Kaladin's work and the group hunkered down for the storm. While it raged outside and Kaladin debated how much longer he could delay returning to Urithiru, the yellow Voidspren appeared beside him. Kaladin told her he could see her and she replied that she wanted him to. She asked Kaladin why he was still there and after a lie, he admitted that the world is changing and he wanted to see which way it went. She asked Kaladin if he would fight for them and he questioned if he would be allowed. She admitted that the final decision isn't with her, as she is just a messenger, but that he will find out once they reach their destination. She finally asked Kaladin how he knew of the approaching highstorm. He said he felt it in his bones and she said humans can't feel storms."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Revolar', 'order': 56, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '96eb7670-b55b-4d8d-bf8d-ac02ae238c17'}, page_content="Kaladin - She gave him a knowing smile and then disappeared. While in Revolar, the number of parshmen camping around the city continued to grow exponentially reaching at least 40,000-50,000 in number. Sah told Kaladin that the number was amazing, that he always imagined the parshmen having their own city and now they do. As they walked through the city, Kaladin saw not only signs of the Everstorm, but also of looting. He asked Sah is this what he wanted, to conquer a kingdom and destroy humankind. Sah confessed that he didn't know, but that he couldn't be a slave again. Kaladin countered that they are his people and that a war to exterminate one side or the other can't be the answer. Sah offered that maybe it doesn't have to be that way, but that he could fight alongside them in something bigger, oppressed against the oppressors. Once he passed where Syl was, she told him that there are a lot of yellow spren around and another highstorm is coming. As Khen's group approached the Parshendi leaders of the small town, the scribe evaluated them and asked about Kaladin's presence. Yixli spoke highly of him, but the scribe said that the Fused would have to label him free. He stepped out of line and saw a tall parshwoman with red eyes, like those of the Shattered Plains. Seeing the Fused, Kaladin knew it was time to go. He sucked in the Stormlight from Khen's pouch and took the pouch from her. He thanked Khen for her kindness, warned her of the impending storm, and said that no matter what she is told, he didn't wish to be her enemy."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Revolar', 'order': 56, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '96eb7670-b55b-4d8d-bf8d-ac02ae238c17'}, page_content="Kaladin - He launched himself into the air as the Fused began to scream. Once in the air, Kaladin looked over the scores of parshmen and he told Syl he can't help but feel a kinship to them. She argued that they're Voidbringers and they conquered the city, but Kaladin explained that they are people who are angry and have good reason to be."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Revolar', 'order': 56, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '96eb7670-b55b-4d8d-bf8d-ac02ae238c17'}, page_content="Kaladin - He reminds her of how he felt about Elhokar, but she countered that he changed his mind. They continue to argue and Kaladin confessed that he just wanted an absolute right on this, not a moral code with exceptions. Kaladin looked down at the city once more and they both realized the parshmen guarding the humans had not done any preparations for the impending storm. Kaladin Lashed himself down to them and shouted warning of the highstorm. They just stared at him, so Kaladin summoned his Blade and warned the people to take refuge wherever they did during the last storms. He charged the parshmen guards to do better and that if they wanted to claim moral superiority over the humans, they have to treat them better than they were treated. During the exchange with the guards, something crashed into Kaladin, tossing him backwards. As they grasped for his throat, Kaladin kicked them off and he Lashed himself into the air. The red-eyed parshman that attacked Kaladin glowed with what looked like dark Stormlight. Another creature appeared and Kaladin Lashed himself straight toward the stormwall. He pleaded with the Stormfather to show mercy and spare the people below. The Stormfather seemed to consider his request, but said it was something that could not be done. Kaladin zoomed to the ground hoping to find the people safe, but it was all for naught. He hit the ground and dropped Syl, seizing a young father, his son, and another woman. He led them to a group of two dozen people and walked with them. Consumed with pain, Kaladin sucked in Stormlight and deflected the storm while the battered people huddled behind him. He provided them with cover, diverting the storm long enough for the people to reach the bunker. Syl was impressed with what he had done, but Kaladin was dissatisfied that it wasn't enough. Kaladin pushed himself out of the stormwall and then rode in front of the storm for a good hour. Syl instructed Kaladin to follow the wind's nudging as the Stormfather's way of apologizing. He allowed the winds to channel him for hours and by the time the storm passed, he found himself outside of Urithiru."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Siege of Kholinar (1174)', 'order': 57, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fe4ab522-c595-45e1-8116-f2a6dc62bd44'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Siege of Kholinar (1174) \n Training and Recruiting Bridge Four Squires \nThe morning after his return, Sigzil came to Kaladin with a list of tasks and decisions for Kaladin to make. He had a lot of details of running an army to tend to.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Siege of Kholinar (1174)', 'order': 57, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fe4ab522-c595-45e1-8116-f2a6dc62bd44'}, page_content="Kaladin - Together they went to the quartermaster's office to check out the royal emerald reserve, to be used for training. Later, Bridge Four went to train and hold try-outs on the Shattered Plains, with Rock providing food & drinks. King Elhokar came by to watch the training to ask Kaladin to join the Kholinar mission. Kaladin helped Hobber breath in Stormlight for the first time and Hobber start healing his legs. The group spotted smoke in the distance, they found a caravan that was attacked by Voidbringers. Among the caravan was Rock's family, who are introduced to Bridge Four. Kaladin attended a conference of the Radiants and leaders. He argued with Jasnah about the motives of the Voidbringers, arguing that the common Parshsmen just want a place to live."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Siege of Kholinar (1174)', 'order': 57, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fe4ab522-c595-45e1-8116-f2a6dc62bd44'}, page_content="Kaladin - He also vehemently disagreed with Jasnah's suggestion to find and kill the Heralds. Later Bridge Four continued training, with almost all of Bridge Four now being able to draw in Stormlight. Kaladin was worried that none of the new recruits had drawn in Stormlight yet, but by the end of the session Lyn was the first new recruit to do so. After a later training, Bridge Four gathered at Rock's cook fire to talk about fitting in, belonging, expectations, and how it sometimes made them feel alone. Afterwards Kaladin noticed Rlain sitting alone, and asked Rlain to explain how he felt. Arriving in Kholinar \n\nAfter his return, Elhokar asked Kaladin to join his mission to open the Kholinar Oathgate and transport the team by flying them with Lashings above the highstorm, which would constantly renew their Stormlight. Before doing so, Kaladin practiced transporting a large group in this manner by flying Dalinar, Navani, and others from the Oathgate in Stormseat to the warcamps, and by flying with Shallan to unlock the Thaylen City Oathgate after Queen Fen Rnamdi finally agrees to have it opened. Afterwards, Dalinar pulled Kaladin aside to inform him that as a Shardbearer, he was a lighteyes suitable to have a landed title. As such, he was granted an area of land on the Deathbend River. After travelling to Thaylen City, Kaladin, along with Elhokar, Adolin, Shallan, Skar, Drehy, Ishnah, and Vathah, undertook a trip atop the next highstorm, using it as fuel to travel from the Shattered Plains to Kholinar. Along the way, he noted that although he cannot reproduce his ability to influence the strength of the winds, he did create a sort of 'channel' that kept the group together as they flew. During the trip, he also briefly had a conversation with Syl about his interest in Shallan, after he reflected on how she seemed to embrace flying above the storms. Once the group arrived, they discussed the beauty of the storm, and Kaladin split from the group to scout below the clouds. Over Kholinar, he identified the banners of humans rulers, and noted the construction of Singer stormshelters. Kaladin finally gave in to his urge to gawk, but was alarmed by the dark aura around the palace. Returning to the group, he consulted them and the group decided to sneak into Kholinar, regardless of the fact that it was still in human hands. The group approached the city wearing disguises made by Shallan. Kaladin's illusion was particularly hideous. The king commanded Kaladin to succeed, believing that he himself would fail. The Wall Guard denied them entrance, but the group quickly entered when the guard was distracted by an attack of the Fused. Kaladin wanted to help the guards, but Adolin persuaded him to ignore it. They sheltered at Adolin's tailor's house, and made plans. Kaladin brought a letter from Elhokar to Shallan, for her to deliver to the palace. Meanwhile, he watched the palace and helped Shallan get back to the tailor's after she escaped. Infiltrating the Wall Guard \nDuring the next planning session, Elhokar charged Kaladin with infiltrating the Wall Guard. Adolin and Elhokar attended a lighteyes feast to gain contacts, and Kaladin went as the head of their guards. Before joining the lighteyed guard tent he went for a walk along the wall."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Siege of Kholinar (1174)', 'order': 57, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fe4ab522-c595-45e1-8116-f2a6dc62bd44'}, page_content='Kaladin - A patrol of the guards met him, and immediately tried to recruit him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Siege of Kholinar (1174)', 'order': 57, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fe4ab522-c595-45e1-8116-f2a6dc62bd44'}, page_content="Kaladin - They offered him a free meal, no strings attached. Over the meal, the guards tried to recruit Kaladin with offers of regular meals and comradery. They were willing to ignore any man's history so long as he was able and willing to fight with them. Later Highmarshal Azure came by on her daily round, and Kaladin was flabbergasted to discover she was a woman and the Wall Guard kept that secret. On Elhokar's orders, Kaladin joined the Wall Guard and went out with them on patrol. He quickly found a familiar sense of belonging with the squad and their banter. The squad helped deliver food to the city, followed by wall duty. Kaladin tried to get information about Azure out of the men. The wall was assaulted by the Fused and Kaladin started giving orders to get the defenders ready, but the attacks ended up elsewhere. Kaladin reported his findings to Adolin and Shallan while they waited out the highstorm in a winehouse. After the high storm, when his platoon was having dinner with Highmarshal Azure, Kaladin was sitting at the officers' table. The highmarshal and Kaladin had a barbed exchange, both trying to get information from the other without revealing anything themselves. They were interrupted when the wall was attacked. Kaladin and Azure charged up the stairs to the wall and focus on the defense. The guard was in chaos under the coordinated attack. Kaladin took charge of a platoon and in the following fight was drawn into a one-on-one fight with a Fused. He managed to kill the Fused and forced himself to use only the bare minimum of stormlight to heal himself after the encounter. The Wall Guards were in awe as it was the first Fused killed. After the battle, Azure pointed out he assembled Voidbringer army, ready for the assault. When she heard about his kill, he reveals he is here on orders of the king. He convinced the highmarshal to reveal the hidden room lined with aluminum where the Soulcasters are working. In return, Kaladin told about the Oathgate and how it is the only way to save the city. The Wall Guard send five to six hundred troops led by Azure and Kaladin to join the assault on the palace. Assault on the Royal Palace \nWhen readying for the assault, Elhokar gave Kaladin the duty to save the Queen and the heir. While the other with the troops storm the palace, Kaladin, Shallan, Skar, and Drehy used their Radiant powers to engage and distract the Fused. They seized the Sunwalk and the eastern gallery, using Shallan's illusions to fake their death, and meet the others in the palace. Kaladin joined Elhokar to lead a force, including Noro's squad, up the stairs to the royal chambers. They found the queen, who has lost her mind and joined the enemy. Kaladin searched the room and Syl found little Gavinor surrounded by red spren. Using his Sylblade Kaladin cut one of the spren, and scared off the other spren. Elhokar and Kaladin then fled down the palace followed by the Queen's Guard. They were met at the bottom by a group of parshaman, led by Sah, Kaladin's friend. Kaladin froze when he noticed he had friends in multiple of the fighting groups, the conflicting loyalties overwhelming him. He tried to stop the fighting, but his efforts were in vain. He was watching Elhokar starting to speak the First Ideal, when Moash came in and killed the king. Drehy, Skar, and Adolin enter just in time to save Kaladin and pull him to safety. Kaladin was in shock and watched while Shallan activated the Oathgate and the group ended up accidentally in Shadesmar."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Training and Recruiting Bridge Four Squires', 'order': 58, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f98bc7ed-853c-43c6-8cb3-cdc871af8d70'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Training and Recruiting Bridge Four Squires \nThe morning after his return, Sigzil came to Kaladin with a list of tasks and decisions for Kaladin to make. He had a lot of details of running an army to tend to.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Training and Recruiting Bridge Four Squires', 'order': 58, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f98bc7ed-853c-43c6-8cb3-cdc871af8d70'}, page_content="Kaladin - Together they went to the quartermaster's office to check out the royal emerald reserve, to be used for training. Later, Bridge Four went to train and hold try-outs on the Shattered Plains, with Rock providing food & drinks. King Elhokar came by to watch the training to ask Kaladin to join the Kholinar mission. Kaladin helped Hobber breath in Stormlight for the first time and Hobber start healing his legs. The group spotted smoke in the distance, they found a caravan that was attacked by Voidbringers. Among the caravan was Rock's family, who are introduced to Bridge Four. Kaladin attended a conference of the Radiants and leaders. He argued with Jasnah about the motives of the Voidbringers, arguing that the common Parshsmen just want a place to live. He also vehemently disagreed with Jasnah's suggestion to find and kill the Heralds. Later Bridge Four continued training, with almost all of Bridge Four now being able to draw in Stormlight. Kaladin was worried that none of the new recruits had drawn in Stormlight yet, but by the end of the session Lyn was the first new recruit to do so. After a later training, Bridge Four gathered at Rock's cook fire to talk about fitting in, belonging, expectations, and how it sometimes made them feel alone. Afterwards Kaladin noticed Rlain sitting alone, and asked Rlain to explain how he felt."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Arriving in Kholinar', 'order': 59, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f509102a-12b5-456d-a45f-546334236c8b'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Arriving in Kholinar \n\nAfter his return, Elhokar asked Kaladin to join his mission to open the Kholinar Oathgate and transport the team by flying them with Lashings above the highstorm, which would constantly renew their Stormlight. Before doing so, Kaladin practiced transporting a large group in this manner by flying Dalinar, Navani, and others from the Oathgate in Stormseat to the warcamps, and by flying with Shallan to unlock the Thaylen City Oathgate after Queen Fen Rnamdi finally agrees to have it opened. Afterwards, Dalinar pulled Kaladin aside to inform him that as a Shardbearer, he was a lighteyes suitable to have a landed title. As such, he was granted an area of land on the Deathbend River. After travelling to Thaylen City, Kaladin, along with Elhokar, Adolin, Shallan, Skar, Drehy, Ishnah, and Vathah, undertook a trip atop the next highstorm, using it as fuel to travel from the Shattered Plains to Kholinar. Along the way, he noted that although he cannot reproduce his ability to influence the strength of the winds, he did create a sort of 'channel' that kept the group together as they flew. During the trip, he also briefly had a conversation with Syl about his interest in Shallan, after he reflected on how she seemed to embrace flying above the storms. Once the group arrived, they discussed the beauty of the storm, and Kaladin split from the group to scout below the clouds. Over Kholinar, he identified the banners of humans rulers, and noted the construction of Singer stormshelters. Kaladin finally gave in to his urge to gawk, but was alarmed by the dark aura around the palace. Returning to the group, he consulted them and the group decided to sneak into Kholinar, regardless of the fact that it was still in human hands. The group approached the city wearing disguises made by Shallan. Kaladin's illusion was particularly hideous. The king commanded Kaladin to succeed, believing that he himself would fail. The Wall Guard denied them entrance, but the group quickly entered when the guard was distracted by an attack of the Fused. Kaladin wanted to help the guards, but Adolin persuaded him to ignore it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Arriving in Kholinar', 'order': 59, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f509102a-12b5-456d-a45f-546334236c8b'}, page_content="Kaladin - They sheltered at Adolin's tailor's house, and made plans. Kaladin brought a letter from Elhokar to Shallan, for her to deliver to the palace. Meanwhile, he watched the palace and helped Shallan get back to the tailor's after she escaped."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Infiltrating the Wall Guard', 'order': 60, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '15d66644-f3e6-48ee-bb4c-908df932a98a'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Infiltrating the Wall Guard \nDuring the next planning session, Elhokar charged Kaladin with infiltrating the Wall Guard. Adolin and Elhokar attended a lighteyes feast to gain contacts, and Kaladin went as the head of their guards. Before joining the lighteyed guard tent he went for a walk along the wall.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Infiltrating the Wall Guard', 'order': 60, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '15d66644-f3e6-48ee-bb4c-908df932a98a'}, page_content='Kaladin - A patrol of the guards met him, and immediately tried to recruit him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Infiltrating the Wall Guard', 'order': 60, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '15d66644-f3e6-48ee-bb4c-908df932a98a'}, page_content="Kaladin - They offered him a free meal, no strings attached. Over the meal, the guards tried to recruit Kaladin with offers of regular meals and comradery. They were willing to ignore any man's history so long as he was able and willing to fight with them. Later Highmarshal Azure came by on her daily round, and Kaladin was flabbergasted to discover she was a woman and the Wall Guard kept that secret. On Elhokar's orders, Kaladin joined the Wall Guard and went out with them on patrol. He quickly found a familiar sense of belonging with the squad and their banter. The squad helped deliver food to the city, followed by wall duty. Kaladin tried to get information about Azure out of the men. The wall was assaulted by the Fused and Kaladin started giving orders to get the defenders ready, but the attacks ended up elsewhere. Kaladin reported his findings to Adolin and Shallan while they waited out the highstorm in a winehouse. After the high storm, when his platoon was having dinner with Highmarshal Azure, Kaladin was sitting at the officers' table. The highmarshal and Kaladin had a barbed exchange, both trying to get information from the other without revealing anything themselves. They were interrupted when the wall was attacked. Kaladin and Azure charged up the stairs to the wall and focus on the defense. The guard was in chaos under the coordinated attack. Kaladin took charge of a platoon and in the following fight was drawn into a one-on-one fight with a Fused. He managed to kill the Fused and forced himself to use only the bare minimum of stormlight to heal himself after the encounter. The Wall Guards were in awe as it was the first Fused killed. After the battle, Azure pointed out he assembled Voidbringer army, ready for the assault. When she heard about his kill, he reveals he is here on orders of the king. He convinced the highmarshal to reveal the hidden room lined with aluminum where the Soulcasters are working. In return, Kaladin told about the Oathgate and how it is the only way to save the city. The Wall Guard send five to six hundred troops led by Azure and Kaladin to join the assault on the palace."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Assault on the Royal Palace', 'order': 61, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6355494a-560a-42a9-acd1-a91844467d68'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Assault on the Royal Palace \nWhen readying for the assault, Elhokar gave Kaladin the duty to save the Queen and the heir. While the other with the troops storm the palace, Kaladin, Shallan, Skar, and Drehy used their Radiant powers to engage and distract the Fused. They seized the Sunwalk and the eastern gallery, using Shallan's illusions to fake their death, and meet the others in the palace. Kaladin joined Elhokar to lead a force, including Noro's squad, up the stairs to the royal chambers. They found the queen, who has lost her mind and joined the enemy. Kaladin searched the room and Syl found little Gavinor surrounded by red spren. Using his Sylblade Kaladin cut one of the spren, and scared off the other spren. Elhokar and Kaladin then fled down the palace followed by the Queen's Guard. They were met at the bottom by a group of parshaman, led by Sah, Kaladin's friend. Kaladin froze when he noticed he had friends in multiple of the fighting groups, the conflicting loyalties overwhelming him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Assault on the Royal Palace', 'order': 61, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6355494a-560a-42a9-acd1-a91844467d68'}, page_content='Kaladin - He tried to stop the fighting, but his efforts were in vain. He was watching Elhokar starting to speak the First Ideal, when Moash came in and killed the king. Drehy, Skar, and Adolin enter just in time to save Kaladin and pull him to safety. Kaladin was in shock and watched while Shallan activated the Oathgate and the group ended up accidentally in Shadesmar.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trip through Shadesmar (1174)', 'order': 62, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3c4b412a-111c-4480-9aae-51461aaefb2f'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Trip through Shadesmar (1174) \nKaladin, Syl, Shallan, Pattern, Azure, Adolin, and his Blade's deadeye found themselves stranded in Shadesmar. Kaladin immediately drew in Stormlight and started hovering, however, this drew the attention of all nearby spren. At Syl's increasingly urgent requests, he let go of the Light. Kaladin was in a broody mood and barely talked, despite Adolin's urging, while the group made their way to the land that represented the Windrunner River in the Physical Realm. They made camp as they were all exhausted. The next morning, Kaladin was sitting on a rock watching the surroundings when Syl came to speak to him. She asked why he didn't sleep, and he evaded the question. She knew something was wrong with him, despite his denials. Later, Adolin started performing a morning kata; Azure joined him, as did Kaladin, who still struggles with the movements. The group discussed their supplies and strategy. Kaladin pressed to go back to the Oathgate to help the city. Moreover, he was shocked to learn about Shadesmar and the existence of spren cities among other things. The group marched along the peninsula corresponding to Windrunner River in the Physical Realm. Kaladin was frustrated and felt like they are abandoning Kholinar and its people, though was aware his thoughts were irrational and linked to his depression coming back. When they reached the lighthouse at the end of the peninsula, Kaladin tried to sneak up on it. As he attracted anticipationspren, he was quickly spotted by the lighthouse keeper, Riino. Riino believed Kaladin was there to have his fortune told, while Kaladin wanted to go and get the others. When he understood what Riino was talking about, Kaladin was aghast at the idea of seeing the future, and said they were looking for passage on a ship. Outside the clouds changed as a highstorm is passing in the Physical. Kaladin is attracted by the globe on the table which was shining brightly and touched it. He had a vision of Dalinar with nine shadows and the danger he was in, then a flash of Thaylen City. Later, Kaladin sat to recover while the others arranged passage and supplies. They debated the destination, but had to take the ship sailed by Reachers to Celebrant. The next morning, Kaladin woke up on the ship. The captain, Ico, took him to the hold to get the special device that could make water for the humans. He then talked with Syl, about the ship and why she was wearing a disguise. Shallan and Kaladin discussed spren and the weird ship. When arriving in Celebrant, the group split up; Kaladin went with Adolin and Syl to change money and buy supplies. Kaladin got distracted by a stall selling paintings, including a painting from the Court of Gods seemingly depicting a figure with nine shadows. The group soon discovered that the city was under control of the Fused."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trip through Shadesmar (1174)', 'order': 62, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3c4b412a-111c-4480-9aae-51461aaefb2f'}, page_content="Kaladin - They narrowly escaped when Syl surrendered herself to a ship of honorspren. The honorspren sailed south-west, letting the group move freely on deck except Syl who was kept captive. Kaladin was very angry over Syl's imprisonment, and wanted to fight her free. Eventually, Kal went to the high deck to use a spyglass. After a conversation with Notum, the captain of the ship, Kaladin started contemplating the Windrunners' Ideals. He felt himself afraid of drawing closer to the Fourth Ideal because of what it might demand of him. This contemplation seemed to cause the first step of manifestating living Shardplate in the form of pinpricks of light trailing soft luminescence in the air next to him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trip through Shadesmar (1174)', 'order': 62, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3c4b412a-111c-4480-9aae-51461aaefb2f'}, page_content="Kaladin - This made some mistspren gasp, whisper, and move away, presumably to fetch the captain. Kaladin was then also able to mentally communicate with Syl, who was still in the hold. The captain confirmed to him that the lights were windspren, an uncommon sight in Shadesmar, as they live almost completely in the Physical Realm. In this conversation with the captain, he revealed that Dalinar had bonded the Stormfather, which impressed the honorspren very much. Shortly thereafter, they spotted eight Fused in pursuit of the ship. They were close to Longbrow's Straits, here a land area, with Thaylen City on the other side. Using the bead of a room, Adolin, Shallan, Kaladin, and their spren snuck into the bead ocean while the honorspren and Azure held off the Fused. Kaladin flew them part of the distance, and the group had an exhausting hike across the land to get to the Thaylen City Oathgate, only to find it guarded. The group attacked the Oathgate in an attempt to get back to the Physical Realm. Kaladin used some of the remaining stormlight to attack the Fused, he managed to draw four into an extended chase. he managed to disarm one of them, and one of the others offered a challenge."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trip through Shadesmar (1174)', 'order': 62, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3c4b412a-111c-4480-9aae-51461aaefb2f'}, page_content="Kaladin - Exactly then his stormlight ran out, and he dropped into the beads. Syl pulled him out of the beads, and during the whole fight encouraged him to speak the fourth ideal. Kaladin wasn't ready yet."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle of Thaylen Field (1174)', 'order': 63, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '008ded6a-f0b0-46b9-97e8-3a5bc3216608'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Battle of Thaylen Field (1174) \n\nDalinar then opened Honor\'s Perpendicularity, allowing Kaladin, along with Shallan and Adolin, to return to the Physical Realm. When appearing out of the perpendicularity Kaladin blocked Amaram\'s blow that was meant to kill Dalinar. Dalinar then ordered Kaladin to guard him and settle the score with Amaram. Kaladin set off into the sky, and felt at home again. He attacked Amaram, who was wielding two Shardblades and had a red glow in his helmet. Kaladin\'s fight was complicated as he also had to watch Dalinar, and defend him from Fused. Slowly Amaram was getting access to the Surges while he was transformed by Yelig-nar. Kaladin was surprised by those, and had trouble adjusting his attacks and defenses. During the fight, Kaladin was suddenly hit with a club by a Fused hidden nearby. Kaladin disabled the Fused\'s arms with his Shardblade, to focus on Amaram again. He fought alternating with Amaram and the Fused. Then Amaram launched into a lecture about honor, which Kaladin dismissed. Kaladin attacked again and broke the highlord\'s breastplate revealing a large crystal underneath. Kaladin attacked the gem and Amaram fell, followed by an attack of eight Fused. The fused swarmed Kaladin, and he tried to dodge them while keeping them engaged away from Dalinar. When Dalinar trapped the Thrill, the Fused fled and suddenly Amaram appeared again. Kaladin whispered "Bridge Four" when Amaram got shot by Rock with an arrow in the head. Afterwards, Lopen brought Stormlight to Kaladin to heal.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle of Thaylen Field (1174)', 'order': 63, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '008ded6a-f0b0-46b9-97e8-3a5bc3216608'}, page_content='Kaladin - Later, Kaladin sat down on a rooftop overlooking Thaylen City. He noticed Shallan kissing Adolin in an alley below. He showed Syl a rock he found on the battlefield, one that changed color when wet. They talked about the Recreance and what it means for the current Radiants. He flew to Bridge Four and had a heart to heart with Teft about the struggles of life.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle of Thaylen Field (1174)', 'order': 63, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '008ded6a-f0b0-46b9-97e8-3a5bc3216608'}, page_content='Kaladin - Later a scout came with an urgent message. Kaladin flew over the ocean to southern Alethkar, where he found Skar and Drehy. They were hiding among the refugees together with little Gavinor.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content='Kaladin -  The War Continues (-) \nAs the war raged on, Kaladin was spread increasingly thin, which was only amplified by the fact that many of the original crew had started picking up squires of their own. In addition to splitting his time between battlefronts in southern Alethkar and Azir, he oversaw the Windrunner training at Urithiru and organized patrols to watch the coalition fleets from the skies. At some point, he was promoted to highmarshal. When Navani requested Windrunners to go on an expedition to Akinah to find the Oathgate there, Kaladin initially suggested sending Teft. Navani refused the suggestion due to the risk of sending a "key" to the Oathgate, in the form of a Shardblade, should it already be taken by the enemy. Instead, Kaladin sent Lopen, Huio, and Cord (who replaced Kaladin\'s original choice of Rock), telling them their mission was to see if the Oathgate was still functional and whether it has fallen into enemy hands. Evacuating Hearthstone \nA few months into the war, Kaladin flew to Hearthstone. It was a pre-arranged visit for him to meet and extract a rebel Herdazian general, who would be hidden by his parents. While Kaladin tried to sneak into the town as part of the line of refugees, multiple Fused had arrived. They were looking for someone with the Windrunner\'s description and they found him. Kaladin fought with this new type of Fused who could turn into a light, move quickly and turn back into a Fused. The Fused almost killed the Windrunner by repeatedly severing his spinal cord, but Kaladin managed to escape. They continued to fight, while Syl and Kal recognized it was a dangerous foe. Kaladin noticed that after three teleports the fused needs a break to get more Voidlight. After loosing the Fused, Stormblessed returned to Hearthstone and was suddenly exhausted. When Syl said they had shown him, Kaladin replied he was almost killed twice. Syl then expressed a worry about Kaladin, who insisted he was fine. While approaching the town, Syl wondered why Kaladin had such trouble sleeping, as humans slept every day and even babies could do it. Kaladin had no reply and felt disconnected from others. At the town, Kal told the singer to fight him, or leave. Six fought him and one died, after which the rest retreated, and left with the others. Kaladin walked to where his mother was waiting and greeted his brother Oroden, who called him "Gagadin". His mother inquired after Lyn, and Syl replied she had broken up with Kal. His mother and Syl talk about him as he wouldn\'t talk about personal issues. He moved to the shed where his mother had hidden the Herdazian general. He found several guards but the general had sneaked off, so Kal asked the guards to pass the message with an invitation from Dalinar. Moving on, he was approached by his father who reprimanded him for not approaching covertly enough. The Windrunner cut the fight short and told his father to start packing. Knowing his parents would not leave the people of the town, he had brought an airship to evacuate them all. The highmarshal escorted his father up the ramp of the Fourth Bridge and introduced him to Dalinar and Navani. After Lirin left to inspect the accommodations, Kaladin apologized for his father\'s behavior which had been lacking in politeness. They quickly discuss the new Fused and the need to defend the ship, and Kal gets a new charge of Stormlight from the Bondsmith. He launched into the air, but not before touching the place where the old bridge was embedded in the deck. Kaladin organized his Windrunners while they watched the Heavenly Ones advance in the distance. He hoped Leshwi would be among them, as he looked forward to fighting her again. The Fused offered the Windrunners one-on-one combat, creating an organized battle field. Leshwi spotted the highmarshal and invited him for a duel. They fought in the sky with Leshwi leading and Kaladin pursuing. Their flight led them around the battlefield and through the town. When they got near the airship, the Fused slowed to inspect it more carefully. This gave Kaladin the opportunity to get a normal spear from Rock that he used a moment later to Lash towards the Heavenly One. With some fancy maneuvers, the Fused managed to escape, leaving Kaladin on the ground where Teft asked if he was alright. They exchanged status reports, and Kaladin ordered the Windrunners to fight defensively. A new Fused appeared and Kaladin accepted its challenge. Kaladin fought with the Fused, and was winning quite quickly as the enemy was using up his light rapidly. When Kaladin had him defeated, he decided to let the Fused go as killing him wouldn\'t help as he would be reborn soon. When the Fused dropped its spear and drifted away, Kaladin noticed a red light streaking for him and started evading instantly. Lyn swooped by checking in on him, and he sent her off with a message to look out for the teleporting Fused. Kaladin remarked to Syl how the others were checking in on him and flew to Dalinar, who was just getting a report from Roshone. The former citylord offered to accompany an Edgedancer to free prisoners from the manor\'s cellar. Syl made Kal admit that the man had improved despite Kal still hating him. Later Kaladin had to watch while Sigzil was fighting with Leshwi, who was clearly the more skilled. He found it very hard not to interfere and help his friend, despite knowing that breaking the rules would be bad for the bigger picture. In the end Leshwi defeated Sigzil but spared his life in return for the Fused Kaladin had spared. She then challenged the highmarshal.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - They fought and dashed through the air, and he noticed most of the fighting was over. They left the town, and the Windrunner realized he knew the terrain very well from his childhood. He used this knowledge to trick Leshwi and scored a hit on her. Shortly after, they managed to stab each other at the same time, draining each other's Light. They both pulled out at the same moment and called it a draw. They scanned the terrain and noticed the Fused from before near the manor go after some civilians. Leshwi then gestured Kaladin to go and save the civilians. Near the manor, Kaladin noticed the strange Fused with a captured Godeke entering the building. He entered as well, and they fought while a Singer soldier activated a device that blocked the Radiants' powers. The Fused taunted Kaladin that without powers he was nothing, but the Windrunner used his experience and killed the soldiers and the Fused. Lift had slipped in and was helping Godeke leave, and Kal asked her to bring the device to Navani. Kaladin moved onward to the cellar where Roshone had gone. He ran through the flames into the tunnel to the cellar, where he found two prisoners already dead. He turned and found Moash, who held Roshone and slit the former city lord's throat. Moash asked whether Kal came to save one of his enemies. When Kaladin jumped to attack, Moash dismissed his Blade and surrendered. They then argued over whether Roshone and Elhokar deserved their fates. Then Moash started speaking in a fatalistic way, saying that everyone was going to die and no one could be saved. This hurt Kaladin and started to exaggerate his depression. The Windrunner froze when Moash outright suggested that Kaladin should kill himself. Then a light exploded in the room that created a vision of who Moash could have been: a Windrunner protecting people. This led Moash to flee, and the light faded to show Renarin, who took Kaladin back to the airship. Retirement \nThe airship had left Hearthstone by the time Kaladin started to come to himself. He looked so bad, one of the ardents brought him soup as if he were one of the refugees."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - Even his Stormlight gave him no energy, and he became depressed thinking about failing Tien and Elhokar. When Syl informed him that Laran had sworn the Third Ideal, he didn't want to join the crowd to congratulate her. His spren noticed his darkness was stronger and didn't know how to help him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - Teft came to see him and didn't let Kal send him away. He told the highmarshal he would go congratulate the Windrunner, and then they talked about Moash. The former sergeant also mentioned that Renarin had reported he had found Kaladin frozen in place again. Without answering, Kaladin got up and went to Laran to see her new Blade. Then he led the Windrunners that flew Dalinar and staff back to the Shattered Plains. When they approached the Shattered Plains, Kaladin was feeling a bit better. Syl came to him and brought Yunfah, the only unbound honorspren willing to bond a Radiant. Kaladin wanted the spren to consider Rlain, but the spren was hesitant. So Kaladin ordered him to try to bond with Rlain before bonding anyone else. The highmarshal then surveyed Narak while landing. He walked to where the Windrunners had landed their passengers and asked Dalinar to go back to Urithiru. The king denied it as he wanted to speak to Kaladin. They spoke about the war, tactics against the Heavenly Ones, and the need for more Windrunners."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - Syl explained the other honorspren found the humans dangerous. The king praised the highmarshal for building up the Windrunners as military force and then relieved him of duty. Kaladin was distressed and at first disagreed, but after a heated argument he had to agree he needed a break from active duty. He wondered what if something happened to one of the others because he wasn't there, to which Dalinar countered by asking what if something happened because he was there and froze. Dalinar let him keep his rank and offered him a position in training the new forces. Kaladin wasn't sure that was right, and he was allowed some time to think on how he wanted to contribute. After they took the Oathgate to Urithiru, Kaladin was thinking about how he had almost no squires left, as most of Bridge Four had become Knights and taken their own squires. Many of them invited Kaladin to join them for one activity or the other, but he declined them all and wanted to be alone. The moment he stepped into his rooms he broke."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - He sank down next to the door, and his emotions overwhelmed him, with the exhaustion and agony washing over him. He thought again about Moash's words, about how everyone was going to die and he would not be able to stop it. He was taken out of his thoughts when someone started knocking on the door."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - It was Adolin, who had been fetched by Syl. The highprince insisted that Kaladin join him for an evening out and wasn't accepting any more excuses. Kaladin was forced to admit he shouldn't be left alone that night, and when they left he did thank Syl. Adolin took them to his favorite winehouse, Jez's Duty, where he had his own booth at which Veil was sitting already. When the barmaid came, he ordered an orange wine, as he knew alcohol would be bad for him in his current mood. Veil and Kaladin exchanged reports on their respective missions. Radiant took over and explained that they had found a balance as the Three, but that there was more going on with her. Kaladin admitted he wasn't sure he could help, as he could barely keep it together himself. Adolin returned, and he and Veil talked about the ongoing wedding party and how Kaladin didn't notice the bar staff. Veil changed the topic of the conversation to finding someone to set up with Kaladin, to the Windrunner's horror. Adolin and Veil took turns suggesting women, and Kal rejected them all. This went on until Veil left to get another drink."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - After a bit of silence, Adolin sat closer to Kaladin. He asked what was going on, and eventually Kaladin admitted he had been relieved of duty. Adolin responded supportively and even allowed that his father could be wrong. He did not know how to, but he wanted to help, thinking that it might also provide him with a way to help Shallan. The highprince eventually got Kaladin to give him some advice on how to help Shallan, and Kaladin's suggestions were exactly the things Adolin had been doing for him that night. The bridgeboy called his companion a fool and suggested they needed to get him a spren, saying that getting rid of his Shardblade would help; Adolin refused this adamantly. Later, Veil joined them and the evening went on. Two hours later, when Rock came to the booth, Adolin and Veil left to let them speak alone. Kaladin tried to avoid the conversation, but Rock insisted as Kaladin had refused several times before. Rock agreed it had been good to wait and give his family time to rest, but now he had to return to his people. He had to face the consequences of his action of lifting the bow to save Kaladin's life. Kal warned him about  Moash, but Skar and Drehy had agreed to escort Rock and his family to the peaks. Kaladin considered going with them, but he realized it would not solve his problems. They embraced in a final farewell, as Rock didn't expect to come back from his journey. Ten days after the return from Hearthstone, Kaladin attended a ceremony where Sigzil was promoted to run the daily business of the Windrunners while Skar was promoted to lead the missions. The highmarshal was still figuring out what new role would suit him. He went to the sparring grounds looking for Zahel, but the swordmaster was out on the field, as he had laundry detail that day. While walking to the field, Kaladin made a short detour to visit Rlain on the growing fields. The listener was overseeing the use of gemstones to aid growth of crops. Rlain complained that humans could not hear the rhythms nor sing the pure tones. Despite that they were making progress. Kaladin told Rlain that Yunfah would try to bond with him. When Rlain learned the spren had been pressured, he didn't want the bond. He then told Kaladin how he became a bridgeman simply because he answered a question from his master. Kaladin found the swordmaster along the laundry lines. He told Zahel about his retirement and asked in a circumspect way if he could join the swordmasters. They discuss reasons to retire, and then Zahel demanded Kaladin fight him. They fought between the laundry lines, with Zahel evading Kaladin while making use of the sheets and a bunch of colorful scarfs. During the fight, the swordmaster continued to question the Radiant on his motives. When Kaladin was defeated, Zahel declared that he could not join the ardents, as Kaladin still loved the fight. They moved to the edge of the plateau, and Zahel gave Kaladin a lecture on Realmatic Theory, explaining how he, the Heralds, and the Fused were all Type Two Invested entities. He told him that one would need a special weapon that could unravel their souls to kill them, and those weapons are dangerous. Surgeon and Mental Health work \nSome days later, Kaladin used the Oathgate to travel to the Shattered Plains while he contemplated what role he wanted. He had come to meet the Fourth Bridge and the refugees from Hearthstone on it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content='Kaladin - He took his parents to Urithiru and gave them a tour of the quarters set aside for the people from Hearthstone. His parents and Syl exchanged joyful banter while they moved about. After looking through the communal spaces, Syl and Kal showed Lirin and Hesina the suite of rooms they had prepared for the family, including a fully-stocked surgery room. Despite the fact that it was stocked with the best and newest inventory, Lirin felt it was useless, as the Radiants had superseded the need for surgeons. Kaladin disagreed and explained that as they had very few Radiants who could heal, normal surgeons were still very much needed. At Syl\'s prodding, Kaladin revealed that he had retired, and his father immediately concluded that Kaladin would start working with him again as a surgeon. Before leaving with the envoy to the honorspren, Adolin came by the clinic to say goodbye to Kaladin. Adolin noticed a long line of mostly women waiting to be helped and told Kaladin that he was now Alethkar\'s most eligible bachelor. Syl explained how this new job was helping Kal. The highprince shared some advice from Zahel about war and suggested they spar when he came back. Kaladin continued to work as a surgeon, which kept him busy and made him "not sad." When the girl who was reading for him left, Syl suddenly started to read the medical reference book for Kaladin, she had learned to read the week before. During a break on one of the balconies, he saw a group of Windrunners flew by and gave him a salute.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - On his return his next patients was Teft, who couldn't leave with the army."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - He has had enough of the war and his struggle with his addiction. They argued a bit, but Kaladin had to accept Teft who would not leave him alone. Kaladin and Teft went to track down a patient who had come through the surgery a while ago. He had been sent to the ardents who after a suicide attempt send him to the Devotary of Mercy. The bridgemen found the monastery and a dark corridor full of people in solitary confinement.They were shocked and questioned the treatment, which was defended by the ardent. Kaladin talked to the patient Noril, and could relate to his depression. Against the ardents protests, they took Noril to a balcony to talk and exchanged experiences. Kaladin then talked to the ardent who said this wasn't in the book of treatments.They had only one treatment for all patients, and Kaladin realized different illnesses need different responses. He was going to try something new. Kaladin started his efforts by focusing on the men with similar symptoms as Noril, battle fatigue, nightmares and melancholy. He organized a group therapy session where they could exchange experiences. His mother was impressed by the results, and Kaladin explained how it was important to be able to speak with someone who actually understood what you felt. And for them to not just know but feel that they weren't alone. Some time later, Lirin and Kaladin discussed the treatment of the patients. Lirin explained how he did not know how little they knew about mental health. Kaladin followed up that the social stigma had prevented research taking place. He wanted a medical revolution, but his father cautioned that change was hard. While they talk, Kaladin slowly realized he could have ended up in the sanatorium. Then Teft came in telling that Dabbid had been missing for three days. They went to search. Teft and Kaladin went to the winehouse for drinks, both sticking to orange. Shortly after, they were joined by Rlain, the whole place falling silent when he entered. They talked about the war and their time running bridges. Then they talked about Dabbid and how Kaladin thought the meetings might be helpful for him. The others including Syl make clear they think Kaladin himself should also join them."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content="Kaladin - He admitted it was helping him. Capture of Urithiru \nWhile still at a tavern in Urithiru, the capture of Urithiru began when Teft fell unconscious and slipped into a coma. Kaladin, while feeling some effects from the Sibling's corruption, turned out to be the only Radiant who remained conscious still in the tower due to how close he was to his Fourth Ideal. When Kaladin took Teft to the clinic that Lirin ran he discovered several other Radiants unconscious. Kaladin wanted to resist against the invaders initially, but was convinced to stand down knowing what may happen to his family if he were discovered. During the first day of the invasion, he went delivering supplies and news to the people of Hearthstone, staying up through the night helping others. However, when several Regal and singer soldiers were going around the tower collecting fallen Radiants, Kaladin could not risk them taking Teft, and he fought back and killed a Regal. He and Lirin argued, and Kaladin was told to go; to attempt to protect his family, Kaladin took Teft and ran into hiding. With the help of Syl, Kaladin went far up into the tower, as far away from other people as possible, but was chased by the Pursuer. With what would be revealed to be the help of the Sibling, he was lead to a hidden room for refuge. Kaladin continued to experience severe nightmares and visions while in hiding. After waking for the first time in hiding, he realized he needed a way to gather supplies so he could resist the Fused and take care of Teft. Kaladin, with the help of Syl, snuck around the tower gathering Stormlight and approached Kuno to ask him for supplies and ensure he could help him in the future. Once he returned to his hiding spot, Navani contacted Kaladin for the first time through the Sibling's veins throughout the tower. Together they developed a plan to scout the Oathgates and determine how the Fused were able to work them even with Kaladin's powers not working as they should. While taking care of Teft, Dabbid was able to find the hidden room with the help of the Sibling. Kaladin felt a sense of relief knowing that Teft would not die if Kaladin died or was captured; he put Dabbid to work taking care of Teft while Kaladin went on his mission to observe the Oathgate. When night fell, Kaladin went with Syl to spy on the Oathgates. He had to climb the side of the tower to avoid being spotted since his Lashings were not working to their fullest capacity. He saw the Oathgate flash with Voidlight that night and determined that they would probably use the Oathgates as infrequently as possible to avoid being spotted. Kaladin decided to steal a spanreed the Fused were using to gather information. Syl changed colors to mimic a Voidspren in order to distract the singer guards so Kaladin could steal a spanreed. Just as Kaladin got matching spanreeds, the Sibling begged for his help; one of their nodes had been discovered by the Fused."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War Continues ({{Rosharan date|1174}}-{{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 64, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1caaf97c-f3b8-48d3-864e-46ec07e7357a'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin, unsure whether he was risking exposing himself to the Pursuer, decided to find the node anyways. When finding the location of the node, Raboniel allowed the Pursuer to attack Kaladin while she corrupted the Sibling. Kaladin tricked the Pursuer into being locked into another hidden room of Urithiru and was able to destroy the node to minimize the Sibling\'s corruption. By the time Kaladin was able to stop Raboniel, he noticed a considerable difference in his healing in particular, especially after Raboniel injured him to observe how his powers were fairing. Raboniel allowed Kaladin to escape, and he ran back to the hidden room and collapsed. Navani came up with the idea of using the glove created by her ardent Tomor for Kaladin to use in replacement of his missing Lashings, and with some training, he was able to use it in combat. The Sibling sensed that the Fused had found their node in the well on the main floor of Urithiru, and while Kaladin was trapped in another nightmare, Dabbid nearly went in his place to protect the node. Once awake, Kaladin hurried to the main floor, and there the Pursuer was once again waiting for him. While fighting the Pursuer, Kaladin challenged Leshwi to a duel, knowing that a fight with her would be more honorable and would keep the Pursuer at bay. Kaladin, with the help of Syl, aimed himself towards the well, to avoid further injuring himself after going through a loophole to avoid a true duel with Leshwi. Kaladin was able to swim with help from Tomor\'s device and destroyed the node in the well. Unfortunately the Sibling\'s corruption had gone so far that his healing was nearly gone, which was especially noticeable since Raboniel had injured him again. Kaladin went to escape the well, knowing he would be surrounded by Fused, but he and Syl were separated and the Pursuer locked him in by adding weights to the top of the well. Kaladin escaped to the underground reservoir and attempted to get to his hidden room but was at risk of being surrounded by singers. Instead, he escaped to the outside of the tower during a highstorm to wait for his Stormlight to renew. While on the side of the tower, Dalinar was able to contact Kaladin through the highstorm; after falling unconscious, Dalinar pushed him into the tower using the winds. Kaladin was taken back to the hidden room by Dabbid, but he fell into a coma, having his consciousness taken to Braize by Odium. During this time on Braize, Kaladin found Wit, who created a bubble of protection to prevent Odium from discovering him for a short amount of time and told Kaladin the story "The Dog and the Dragon". Dabbid went to ask for help from Rlain, as he believed Kaladin was dying, and Venli helped get Lift out of her prison to heal Kaladin. Lift healed both Kaladin and Teft, and they began to develop a plan to protect the Sibling\'s final node. When they learned that the final node was in danger, exhausted, Kaladin went to face the Pursuer once more with the remnants of Bridge Four, Lift, and Venli. Kaladin destroyed the Pursuer\'s reputation, deeming him "the Defeated One", and defeated him by humiliating him. But, after feeling energized, he discovered Teft dead by the hand of Vyre and was rendered catatonic.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Evacuating Hearthstone', 'order': 65, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1d5f093c-b6e9-4d18-b2d2-c8c03c6de8ca'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Evacuating Hearthstone \nA few months into the war, Kaladin flew to Hearthstone. It was a pre-arranged visit for him to meet and extract a rebel Herdazian general, who would be hidden by his parents. While Kaladin tried to sneak into the town as part of the line of refugees, multiple Fused had arrived. They were looking for someone with the Windrunner\'s description and they found him. Kaladin fought with this new type of Fused who could turn into a light, move quickly and turn back into a Fused. The Fused almost killed the Windrunner by repeatedly severing his spinal cord, but Kaladin managed to escape. They continued to fight, while Syl and Kal recognized it was a dangerous foe. Kaladin noticed that after three teleports the fused needs a break to get more Voidlight. After loosing the Fused, Stormblessed returned to Hearthstone and was suddenly exhausted. When Syl said they had shown him, Kaladin replied he was almost killed twice. Syl then expressed a worry about Kaladin, who insisted he was fine. While approaching the town, Syl wondered why Kaladin had such trouble sleeping, as humans slept every day and even babies could do it. Kaladin had no reply and felt disconnected from others. At the town, Kal told the singer to fight him, or leave. Six fought him and one died, after which the rest retreated, and left with the others. Kaladin walked to where his mother was waiting and greeted his brother Oroden, who called him "Gagadin". His mother inquired after Lyn, and Syl replied she had broken up with Kal.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Evacuating Hearthstone', 'order': 65, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1d5f093c-b6e9-4d18-b2d2-c8c03c6de8ca'}, page_content="Kaladin - His mother and Syl talk about him as he wouldn't talk about personal issues. He moved to the shed where his mother had hidden the Herdazian general. He found several guards but the general had sneaked off, so Kal asked the guards to pass the message with an invitation from Dalinar. Moving on, he was approached by his father who reprimanded him for not approaching covertly enough. The Windrunner cut the fight short and told his father to start packing. Knowing his parents would not leave the people of the town, he had brought an airship to evacuate them all. The highmarshal escorted his father up the ramp of the Fourth Bridge and introduced him to Dalinar and Navani. After Lirin left to inspect the accommodations, Kaladin apologized for his father's behavior which had been lacking in politeness. They quickly discuss the new Fused and the need to defend the ship, and Kal gets a new charge of Stormlight from the Bondsmith. He launched into the air, but not before touching the place where the old bridge was embedded in the deck. Kaladin organized his Windrunners while they watched the Heavenly Ones advance in the distance. He hoped Leshwi would be among them, as he looked forward to fighting her again. The Fused offered the Windrunners one-on-one combat, creating an organized battle field. Leshwi spotted the highmarshal and invited him for a duel. They fought in the sky with Leshwi leading and Kaladin pursuing. Their flight led them around the battlefield and through the town. When they got near the airship, the Fused slowed to inspect it more carefully. This gave Kaladin the opportunity to get a normal spear from Rock that he used a moment later to Lash towards the Heavenly One. With some fancy maneuvers, the Fused managed to escape, leaving Kaladin on the ground where Teft asked if he was alright. They exchanged status reports, and Kaladin ordered the Windrunners to fight defensively. A new Fused appeared and Kaladin accepted its challenge. Kaladin fought with the Fused, and was winning quite quickly as the enemy was using up his light rapidly. When Kaladin had him defeated, he decided to let the Fused go as killing him wouldn't help as he would be reborn soon. When the Fused dropped its spear and drifted away, Kaladin noticed a red light streaking for him and started evading instantly. Lyn swooped by checking in on him, and he sent her off with a message to look out for the teleporting Fused. Kaladin remarked to Syl how the others were checking in on him and flew to Dalinar, who was just getting a report from Roshone. The former citylord offered to accompany an Edgedancer to free prisoners from the manor's cellar. Syl made Kal admit that the man had improved despite Kal still hating him. Later Kaladin had to watch while Sigzil was fighting with Leshwi, who was clearly the more skilled. He found it very hard not to interfere and help his friend, despite knowing that breaking the rules would be bad for the bigger picture. In the end Leshwi defeated Sigzil but spared his life in return for the Fused Kaladin had spared. She then challenged the highmarshal."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Evacuating Hearthstone', 'order': 65, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1d5f093c-b6e9-4d18-b2d2-c8c03c6de8ca'}, page_content='Kaladin - They fought and dashed through the air, and he noticed most of the fighting was over. They left the town, and the Windrunner realized he knew the terrain very well from his childhood. He used this knowledge to trick Leshwi and scored a hit on her.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Evacuating Hearthstone', 'order': 65, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1d5f093c-b6e9-4d18-b2d2-c8c03c6de8ca'}, page_content="Kaladin - Shortly after, they managed to stab each other at the same time, draining each other's Light."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Evacuating Hearthstone', 'order': 65, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1d5f093c-b6e9-4d18-b2d2-c8c03c6de8ca'}, page_content="Kaladin - They both pulled out at the same moment and called it a draw. They scanned the terrain and noticed the Fused from before near the manor go after some civilians. Leshwi then gestured Kaladin to go and save the civilians. Near the manor, Kaladin noticed the strange Fused with a captured Godeke entering the building. He entered as well, and they fought while a Singer soldier activated a device that blocked the Radiants' powers. The Fused taunted Kaladin that without powers he was nothing, but the Windrunner used his experience and killed the soldiers and the Fused. Lift had slipped in and was helping Godeke leave, and Kal asked her to bring the device to Navani. Kaladin moved onward to the cellar where Roshone had gone. He ran through the flames into the tunnel to the cellar, where he found two prisoners already dead. He turned and found Moash, who held Roshone and slit the former city lord's throat. Moash asked whether Kal came to save one of his enemies. When Kaladin jumped to attack, Moash dismissed his Blade and surrendered. They then argued over whether Roshone and Elhokar deserved their fates. Then Moash started speaking in a fatalistic way, saying that everyone was going to die and no one could be saved. This hurt Kaladin and started to exaggerate his depression. The Windrunner froze when Moash outright suggested that Kaladin should kill himself. Then a light exploded in the room that created a vision of who Moash could have been: a Windrunner protecting people. This led Moash to flee, and the light faded to show Renarin, who took Kaladin back to the airship."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Retirement', 'order': 66, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6ae0743e-c2a8-4eef-8401-adb722756609'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Retirement \nThe airship had left Hearthstone by the time Kaladin started to come to himself. He looked so bad, one of the ardents brought him soup as if he were one of the refugees.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Retirement', 'order': 66, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6ae0743e-c2a8-4eef-8401-adb722756609'}, page_content="Kaladin - Even his Stormlight gave him no energy, and he became depressed thinking about failing Tien and Elhokar. When Syl informed him that Laran had sworn the Third Ideal, he didn't want to join the crowd to congratulate her. His spren noticed his darkness was stronger and didn't know how to help him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Retirement', 'order': 66, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6ae0743e-c2a8-4eef-8401-adb722756609'}, page_content="Kaladin - Teft came to see him and didn't let Kal send him away. He told the highmarshal he would go congratulate the Windrunner, and then they talked about Moash. The former sergeant also mentioned that Renarin had reported he had found Kaladin frozen in place again. Without answering, Kaladin got up and went to Laran to see her new Blade. Then he led the Windrunners that flew Dalinar and staff back to the Shattered Plains. When they approached the Shattered Plains, Kaladin was feeling a bit better. Syl came to him and brought Yunfah, the only unbound honorspren willing to bond a Radiant. Kaladin wanted the spren to consider Rlain, but the spren was hesitant. So Kaladin ordered him to try to bond with Rlain before bonding anyone else. The highmarshal then surveyed Narak while landing. He walked to where the Windrunners had landed their passengers and asked Dalinar to go back to Urithiru. The king denied it as he wanted to speak to Kaladin. They spoke about the war, tactics against the Heavenly Ones, and the need for more Windrunners. Syl explained the other honorspren found the humans dangerous. The king praised the highmarshal for building up the Windrunners as military force and then relieved him of duty. Kaladin was distressed and at first disagreed, but after a heated argument he had to agree he needed a break from active duty. He wondered what if something happened to one of the others because he wasn't there, to which Dalinar countered by asking what if something happened because he was there and froze. Dalinar let him keep his rank and offered him a position in training the new forces. Kaladin wasn't sure that was right, and he was allowed some time to think on how he wanted to contribute. After they took the Oathgate to Urithiru, Kaladin was thinking about how he had almost no squires left, as most of Bridge Four had become Knights and taken their own squires. Many of them invited Kaladin to join them for one activity or the other, but he declined them all and wanted to be alone. The moment he stepped into his rooms he broke."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Retirement', 'order': 66, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6ae0743e-c2a8-4eef-8401-adb722756609'}, page_content="Kaladin - He sank down next to the door, and his emotions overwhelmed him, with the exhaustion and agony washing over him. He thought again about Moash's words, about how everyone was going to die and he would not be able to stop it. He was taken out of his thoughts when someone started knocking on the door."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Retirement', 'order': 66, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6ae0743e-c2a8-4eef-8401-adb722756609'}, page_content="Kaladin - It was Adolin, who had been fetched by Syl. The highprince insisted that Kaladin join him for an evening out and wasn't accepting any more excuses. Kaladin was forced to admit he shouldn't be left alone that night, and when they left he did thank Syl. Adolin took them to his favorite winehouse, Jez's Duty, where he had his own booth at which Veil was sitting already. When the barmaid came, he ordered an orange wine, as he knew alcohol would be bad for him in his current mood. Veil and Kaladin exchanged reports on their respective missions. Radiant took over and explained that they had found a balance as the Three, but that there was more going on with her. Kaladin admitted he wasn't sure he could help, as he could barely keep it together himself. Adolin returned, and he and Veil talked about the ongoing wedding party and how Kaladin didn't notice the bar staff. Veil changed the topic of the conversation to finding someone to set up with Kaladin, to the Windrunner's horror. Adolin and Veil took turns suggesting women, and Kal rejected them all. This went on until Veil left to get another drink. After a bit of silence, Adolin sat closer to Kaladin. He asked what was going on, and eventually Kaladin admitted he had been relieved of duty. Adolin responded supportively and even allowed that his father could be wrong. He did not know how to, but he wanted to help, thinking that it might also provide him with a way to help Shallan. The highprince eventually got Kaladin to give him some advice on how to help Shallan, and Kaladin's suggestions were exactly the things Adolin had been doing for him that night. The bridgeboy called his companion a fool and suggested they needed to get him a spren, saying that getting rid of his Shardblade would help; Adolin refused this adamantly. Later, Veil joined them and the evening went on. Two hours later, when Rock came to the booth, Adolin and Veil left to let them speak alone. Kaladin tried to avoid the conversation, but Rock insisted as Kaladin had refused several times before. Rock agreed it had been good to wait and give his family time to rest, but now he had to return to his people. He had to face the consequences of his action of lifting the bow to save Kaladin's life. Kal warned him about  Moash, but Skar and Drehy had agreed to escort Rock and his family to the peaks. Kaladin considered going with them, but he realized it would not solve his problems. They embraced in a final farewell, as Rock didn't expect to come back from his journey. Ten days after the return from Hearthstone, Kaladin attended a ceremony where Sigzil was promoted to run the daily business of the Windrunners while Skar was promoted to lead the missions. The highmarshal was still figuring out what new role would suit him. He went to the sparring grounds looking for Zahel, but the swordmaster was out on the field, as he had laundry detail that day. While walking to the field, Kaladin made a short detour to visit Rlain on the growing fields. The listener was overseeing the use of gemstones to aid growth of crops. Rlain complained that humans could not hear the rhythms nor sing the pure tones. Despite that they were making progress. Kaladin told Rlain that Yunfah would try to bond with him. When Rlain learned the spren had been pressured, he didn't want the bond. He then told Kaladin how he became a bridgeman simply because he answered a question from his master. Kaladin found the swordmaster along the laundry lines. He told Zahel about his retirement and asked in a circumspect way if he could join the swordmasters. They discuss reasons to retire, and then Zahel demanded Kaladin fight him. They fought between the laundry lines, with Zahel evading Kaladin while making use of the sheets and a bunch of colorful scarfs. During the fight, the swordmaster continued to question the Radiant on his motives. When Kaladin was defeated, Zahel declared that he could not join the ardents, as Kaladin still loved the fight. They moved to the edge of the plateau, and Zahel gave Kaladin a lecture on Realmatic Theory, explaining how he, the Heralds, and the Fused were all Type Two Invested entities. He told him that one would need a special weapon that could unravel their souls to kill them, and those weapons are dangerous."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgeon and Mental Health work', 'order': 67, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '729b0126-f4d8-4a69-b63c-9f8fd460a989'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Surgeon and Mental Health work \nSome days later, Kaladin used the Oathgate to travel to the Shattered Plains while he contemplated what role he wanted. He had come to meet the Fourth Bridge and the refugees from Hearthstone on it.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgeon and Mental Health work', 'order': 67, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '729b0126-f4d8-4a69-b63c-9f8fd460a989'}, page_content='Kaladin - He took his parents to Urithiru and gave them a tour of the quarters set aside for the people from Hearthstone. His parents and Syl exchanged joyful banter while they moved about. After looking through the communal spaces, Syl and Kal showed Lirin and Hesina the suite of rooms they had prepared for the family, including a fully-stocked surgery room. Despite the fact that it was stocked with the best and newest inventory, Lirin felt it was useless, as the Radiants had superseded the need for surgeons. Kaladin disagreed and explained that as they had very few Radiants who could heal, normal surgeons were still very much needed. At Syl\'s prodding, Kaladin revealed that he had retired, and his father immediately concluded that Kaladin would start working with him again as a surgeon. Before leaving with the envoy to the honorspren, Adolin came by the clinic to say goodbye to Kaladin. Adolin noticed a long line of mostly women waiting to be helped and told Kaladin that he was now Alethkar\'s most eligible bachelor. Syl explained how this new job was helping Kal. The highprince shared some advice from Zahel about war and suggested they spar when he came back. Kaladin continued to work as a surgeon, which kept him busy and made him "not sad." When the girl who was reading for him left, Syl suddenly started to read the medical reference book for Kaladin, she had learned to read the week before. During a break on one of the balconies, he saw a group of Windrunners flew by and gave him a salute. On his return his next patients was Teft, who couldn\'t leave with the army.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgeon and Mental Health work', 'order': 67, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '729b0126-f4d8-4a69-b63c-9f8fd460a989'}, page_content="Kaladin - He has had enough of the war and his struggle with his addiction. They argued a bit, but Kaladin had to accept Teft who would not leave him alone. Kaladin and Teft went to track down a patient who had come through the surgery a while ago. He had been sent to the ardents who after a suicide attempt send him to the Devotary of Mercy. The bridgemen found the monastery and a dark corridor full of people in solitary confinement.They were shocked and questioned the treatment, which was defended by the ardent. Kaladin talked to the patient Noril, and could relate to his depression. Against the ardents protests, they took Noril to a balcony to talk and exchanged experiences. Kaladin then talked to the ardent who said this wasn't in the book of treatments.They had only one treatment for all patients, and Kaladin realized different illnesses need different responses. He was going to try something new. Kaladin started his efforts by focusing on the men with similar symptoms as Noril, battle fatigue, nightmares and melancholy. He organized a group therapy session where they could exchange experiences. His mother was impressed by the results, and Kaladin explained how it was important to be able to speak with someone who actually understood what you felt. And for them to not just know but feel that they weren't alone. Some time later, Lirin and Kaladin discussed the treatment of the patients. Lirin explained how he did not know how little they knew about mental health. Kaladin followed up that the social stigma had prevented research taking place. He wanted a medical revolution, but his father cautioned that change was hard. While they talk, Kaladin slowly realized he could have ended up in the sanatorium. Then Teft came in telling that Dabbid had been missing for three days. They went to search. Teft and Kaladin went to the winehouse for drinks, both sticking to orange. Shortly after, they were joined by Rlain, the whole place falling silent when he entered. They talked about the war and their time running bridges. Then they talked about Dabbid and how Kaladin thought the meetings might be helpful for him. The others including Syl make clear they think Kaladin himself should also join them. He admitted it was helping him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Capture of Urithiru', 'order': 68, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b992e05e-d5f4-40e0-924d-34cbbeae1d77'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Capture of Urithiru \nWhile still at a tavern in Urithiru, the capture of Urithiru began when Teft fell unconscious and slipped into a coma. Kaladin, while feeling some effects from the Sibling's corruption, turned out to be the only Radiant who remained conscious still in the tower due to how close he was to his Fourth Ideal. When Kaladin took Teft to the clinic that Lirin ran he discovered several other Radiants unconscious. Kaladin wanted to resist against the invaders initially, but was convinced to stand down knowing what may happen to his family if he were discovered. During the first day of the invasion, he went delivering supplies and news to the people of Hearthstone, staying up through the night helping others. However, when several Regal and singer soldiers were going around the tower collecting fallen Radiants, Kaladin could not risk them taking Teft, and he fought back and killed a Regal. He and Lirin argued, and Kaladin was told to go; to attempt to protect his family, Kaladin took Teft and ran into hiding. With the help of Syl, Kaladin went far up into the tower, as far away from other people as possible, but was chased by the Pursuer. With what would be revealed to be the help of the Sibling, he was lead to a hidden room for refuge. Kaladin continued to experience severe nightmares and visions while in hiding. After waking for the first time in hiding, he realized he needed a way to gather supplies so he could resist the Fused and take care of Teft. Kaladin, with the help of Syl, snuck around the tower gathering Stormlight and approached Kuno to ask him for supplies and ensure he could help him in the future. Once he returned to his hiding spot, Navani contacted Kaladin for the first time through the Sibling's veins throughout the tower. Together they developed a plan to scout the Oathgates and determine how the Fused were able to work them even with Kaladin's powers not working as they should. While taking care of Teft, Dabbid was able to find the hidden room with the help of the Sibling. Kaladin felt a sense of relief knowing that Teft would not die if Kaladin died or was captured; he put Dabbid to work taking care of Teft while Kaladin went on his mission to observe the Oathgate. When night fell, Kaladin went with Syl to spy on the Oathgates. He had to climb the side of the tower to avoid being spotted since his Lashings were not working to their fullest capacity. He saw the Oathgate flash with Voidlight that night and determined that they would probably use the Oathgates as infrequently as possible to avoid being spotted. Kaladin decided to steal a spanreed the Fused were using to gather information. Syl changed colors to mimic a Voidspren in order to distract the singer guards so Kaladin could steal a spanreed. Just as Kaladin got matching spanreeds, the Sibling begged for his help; one of their nodes had been discovered by the Fused."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Capture of Urithiru', 'order': 68, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b992e05e-d5f4-40e0-924d-34cbbeae1d77'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin, unsure whether he was risking exposing himself to the Pursuer, decided to find the node anyways. When finding the location of the node, Raboniel allowed the Pursuer to attack Kaladin while she corrupted the Sibling. Kaladin tricked the Pursuer into being locked into another hidden room of Urithiru and was able to destroy the node to minimize the Sibling's corruption. By the time Kaladin was able to stop Raboniel, he noticed a considerable difference in his healing in particular, especially after Raboniel injured him to observe how his powers were fairing."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Capture of Urithiru', 'order': 68, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b992e05e-d5f4-40e0-924d-34cbbeae1d77'}, page_content='Kaladin - Raboniel allowed Kaladin to escape, and he ran back to the hidden room and collapsed. Navani came up with the idea of using the glove created by her ardent Tomor for Kaladin to use in replacement of his missing Lashings, and with some training, he was able to use it in combat. The Sibling sensed that the Fused had found their node in the well on the main floor of Urithiru, and while Kaladin was trapped in another nightmare, Dabbid nearly went in his place to protect the node.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Capture of Urithiru', 'order': 68, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b992e05e-d5f4-40e0-924d-34cbbeae1d77'}, page_content='Kaladin - Once awake, Kaladin hurried to the main floor, and there the Pursuer was once again waiting for him. While fighting the Pursuer, Kaladin challenged Leshwi to a duel, knowing that a fight with her would be more honorable and would keep the Pursuer at bay. Kaladin, with the help of Syl, aimed himself towards the well, to avoid further injuring himself after going through a loophole to avoid a true duel with Leshwi. Kaladin was able to swim with help from Tomor\'s device and destroyed the node in the well. Unfortunately the Sibling\'s corruption had gone so far that his healing was nearly gone, which was especially noticeable since Raboniel had injured him again. Kaladin went to escape the well, knowing he would be surrounded by Fused, but he and Syl were separated and the Pursuer locked him in by adding weights to the top of the well. Kaladin escaped to the underground reservoir and attempted to get to his hidden room but was at risk of being surrounded by singers. Instead, he escaped to the outside of the tower during a highstorm to wait for his Stormlight to renew. While on the side of the tower, Dalinar was able to contact Kaladin through the highstorm; after falling unconscious, Dalinar pushed him into the tower using the winds. Kaladin was taken back to the hidden room by Dabbid, but he fell into a coma, having his consciousness taken to Braize by Odium. During this time on Braize, Kaladin found Wit, who created a bubble of protection to prevent Odium from discovering him for a short amount of time and told Kaladin the story "The Dog and the Dragon". Dabbid went to ask for help from Rlain, as he believed Kaladin was dying, and Venli helped get Lift out of her prison to heal Kaladin. Lift healed both Kaladin and Teft, and they began to develop a plan to protect the Sibling\'s final node. When they learned that the final node was in danger, exhausted, Kaladin went to face the Pursuer once more with the remnants of Bridge Four, Lift, and Venli. Kaladin destroyed the Pursuer\'s reputation, deeming him "the Defeated One", and defeated him by humiliating him. But, after feeling energized, he discovered Teft dead by the hand of Vyre and was rendered catatonic.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The 4th Ideal ({{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 69, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4c9cfe01-c48f-4919-a9f4-0fd6aa9c102c'}, page_content='Kaladin -  The 4th Ideal () \nAfter Teft was killed by Vyre, Kaladin became emotionally broken. He killed the Pursuer in a rage, while a Heavenly One took Lirin up to the top of Urithiru. Kaladin followed, using Navani\'s fabrial, whereupon the Heavenly One grew frightened and dropped Lirin. Kaladin stood atop Urithiru, watching Lirin fall, and realized why he came to the top of the tower. At Honor\'s Chasm, he chose life, and so this time, he made the opposite choice: he jumped, attempting suicide. However, Dalinar, riding the storm at the time, demanded that the Stormfather give Kaladin more time to think. The Stormfather took Kaladin into the "place between time" and talked to him, albeit unsuccessfully. Dalinar, using his Bondsmith abilities, took Kaladin into a vision connected to Tien. The apparition of Tien convinced Kaladin to embrace the moment and accept that all people must eventually die, admitting that he chose to be used as cannon fodder to cheer up the other boys. Returning to the real world with newfound sense of peace, Kaladin kept falling, but found the strength to declare his Fourth Ideal. Rather than the Stormfather, it was Dalinar who accepted Kaladin\'s words. Around Kaladin, windspren transformed into his Shardplate. Teft\'s Funeral \nKaladin attended Teft\'s funeral after the Fused were fully exiled from Urithiru. He left the gathering early to try to speak with Dalinar, who attempted to apologize for forcing him to retire from military duty.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The 4th Ideal ({{Rosharan date|1175}})', 'order': 69, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4c9cfe01-c48f-4919-a9f4-0fd6aa9c102c'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin stopped him, affirming that it was the right choice, and requested that he be allowed to continue furthering his pursuit in the burgeoning field of mental health. Dalinar accepted this request and also returned his Trailman's flute, which was thought to be lost until Lift found in the Breakaway market. After their conversation, Kaladin and Syl went to the Breakaway market to look through the merchant's bins where Lift found the flute. He found a carved wooden horse that Tien had given him just before they entered the army. He was shocked to see it in Urithiru, as he had lost it in Alethkar. Remembering Tien through it, Kaladin decided to buy the horse off the merchant. Following this, he went to the tavern to attend a group therapy session, like he had promised Teft."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Teft's Funeral", 'order': 70, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7854ebf5-1a95-4159-b934-e77a1a8988ce'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Teft's Funeral \nKaladin attended Teft's funeral after the Fused were fully exiled from Urithiru. He left the gathering early to try to speak with Dalinar, who attempted to apologize for forcing him to retire from military duty."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Teft's Funeral", 'order': 70, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7854ebf5-1a95-4159-b934-e77a1a8988ce'}, page_content="Kaladin - Kaladin stopped him, affirming that it was the right choice, and requested that he be allowed to continue furthering his pursuit in the burgeoning field of mental health. Dalinar accepted this request and also returned his Trailman's flute, which was thought to be lost until Lift found in the Breakaway market. After their conversation, Kaladin and Syl went to the Breakaway market to look through the merchant's bins where Lift found the flute. He found a carved wooden horse that Tien had given him just before they entered the army. He was shocked to see it in Urithiru, as he had lost it in Alethkar. Remembering Tien through it, Kaladin decided to buy the horse off the merchant. Following this, he went to the tavern to attend a group therapy session, like he had promised Teft."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 71, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0017f13a-088e-4170-bf7f-02420e436610'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Relationships \n\n Adolin Kholin \n\nKaladin first sees Adolin saving a darkeyed prostitute who is being harassed by some lighteyed officers. Despite this, Kaladin, due to his past interactions with lighteyes, marks it up as an act. Their relationship sours even more when they next meet face-to-face, with Kaladin seeing Adolin as spoiled and arrogant and Adolin disliking Kaladin\'s condescending attitude and willingness to order those clearly above him in rank. Their interactions manifest in glares and taunts with each only tolerating the other out of necessity. This changes when Kaladin, at a suicidal disadvantage, aids Adolin in a battle against four other Shardbearers. After the duel, while the king offers a boon to Adolin, Kaladin unknowingly embarrasses Elhokar by demanding a Right of Challenge to face Amaram in the arena, resulting in his incarceration. This only further convinces Kaladin that lighteyes can\'t be trusted. Upon being freed, however, he discovers that Adolin had demanded to be locked up in the same prison, and had refused to be released until Kaladin was pardoned. When questioned why, the prince only says that it wasn\'t right after Kaladin had saved his life. Adolin then offers Kaladin one of the newly won sets of Shards, though the former bridgeman refuses both, stating that the artifacts had killed too many of his friends for him to want anything to do with them. Confused, the prince instead gives the set to Moash at Kaladin\'s recommendation. From there the two become good friends, although their friendship is stressed due to their mutual attraction to Shallan Davar. After a while, Shallan and Adolin confess their love to each other and Kaladin gives up on her for good. Throughout their relationship, Adolin notices Kaladin\'s numerous depressive spirals and helps to break him of them, subtly or not, by forcing Kaladin to spend time around friends and not be alone with his thoughts. Adolin\'s support of Kaladin is highlighted after Kaladin is relieved of duty as Highmarshal, resulting in Kaladin\'s depression worsening, and Adolin insists he accompany him to winehouses and various outings. Bridge Four \n Drehy \nDrehy was one of the first friends that Kaladin made on Bridge Four, and one of the first people to stand up for him. He was also one of the first men that Kaladin trained in first-aid. While Kaladin does accept his sexuality, he isn\'t completely bereft of homophobia. He considers Drehy to be unmasculine, and considers Drehy\'s own beliefs in Vorin gender norms to be funny considering his sexuality. His displays of this prejudice are rare, but when they do occur they clearly make Drehy uncomfortable, and he isn\'t afraid to speak up about it. Moash \nKaladin and Moash have a very complex relationship that changed in nature drastically over time. In the beginning, they were both members of Bridge Four, but they had a very tense and hostile relationship, with Moash constantly mocking him and challenging his authority as bridge leader. Kaladin often has to resort to forcibly dragging him out of the barracks in order to get him to do his duty. Eventually, they become rather close, despite their occasionally disagreements in philosophy. Their relationship began to turn towards hatred once again once Moash attempted to assassinate Elhokar, and later became a servant of the Fused. It was only further soured by his successful assassination of Elhokar during the Siege of Kholinar. Moash himself has complex views on Kaladin, but all of these feelings can ultimately be boiled down to overwhelming obsession. Teft \nTeft was the first bridgeman Kaladin approaches to ask for support in his plans for Bridge Four after refusing to commit suicide at Honor Chasm, and due to this they developed a very close relationship over time. Teft was also the first to suspect Kaladin\'s nature as a nascent Knights Radiant. Kaladin worries about Teft\'s firemoss addiction, and wants to help and support him, but respected his privacy enough to leave him alone until it became a serious problem. Teft\'s death during the occupation of Urithiru was enough to fully push Kaladin over the edge, leading him to become almost catatonic. Eventually, the despair from losing him led him to attempt suicide again, and actually go through with the attempt. Although Dalinar managed to convince him to survive while he was falling, leading to him swearing the Fourth Oath. He still feels a deep grief over his death, and does his best to follow through with the promises he made with Teft, joining in group therapy sessions and working to fix the way that Alethkar deals with mental health. Teft felt a sense of pride at how Kaladin was able to keep fighting no matter what tried to drag him down. Shallan Davar \nKaladin and Shallan are among the first new Knights Radiant in centuries. They both reveal themselves independently during the Battle of Narak, together serving as the catalyst for the refounding of the order. Kaladin and Shallan initially have a strained relationship. During their first meeting, Shallan tricks Kaladin out of his new boots. During their later meetings, Kaladin suspects Shallan of being a spy or opportunist at worst, and a privileged, unempathetic lighteyes at best. This clash of personalities is reflected in their respective spren, as the Cryptics (to which Shallan\'s spren Pattern belongs) and honorspren are involved in a complex spren conflict. Later, when Kaladin and Shallan are both stranded in the chasms of the Shattered Plains, they grow to respect and admire one another. During this time, they reveal some of their personal history and secrets to each other, including the fact that Shallan has a Shardblade. Although unsure of their own natures as members of the Knights Radiant, this incident causes them to suspect each other of being more than meets the eye. As time passes, the two of them grow closer together, with Shallan admitting that Veil is attracted to him. In the end, however, she chooses Adolin instead. When Syl asks how Kaladin feels about this, he claims that she lifted his burdens a bit and reminded him of Tien (possibly since they were both Lightweavers), but that he never actually loved her. Sylphrena \nSylphrena, known as Syl, is the honorspren that Kaladin has bonded. Syl is Kaladin\'s constant companion and perhaps his best friend. In addition to providing Kaladin with companionship and guidance, Kaladin\'s bond with Syl is what allows him access to his Surgebinder abilities and to become a member of the Knights Radiant. Syl is also a living weapon and is able to manifest herself as a Shardblade. Syl\'s existence, the Knights Radiant, and Kaladin are linked together. When Kaladin doesn\'t live up to the oaths that he has made as a Knight Radiant, Syl slowly loses intelligence and is eventually "killed." When Kaladin reaffirms his oaths, he is able to revive Syl, although it is implied that there is a way for Kaladin to more permanently kill Syl. Initially, Syl is attracted to Kaladin because of his urge to save others. In this initial stage, she behaves much like a normal windspren, having no sentience.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 71, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0017f13a-088e-4170-bf7f-02420e436610'}, page_content="Kaladin - As her bond with Kaladin grows, she gains intelligence, progressing from child-like naivety to understanding complex concepts. She also begins to remember parts of her past; for example, she remembers her own name (and her nickname) when Kaladin asks her if she has a name. She also gains the ability to manifest herself into different forms, initially as things like a ribbon of light, a leaf, and a young woman, and eventually into a Shardblade. Kaladin shares with Syl his regrets of not being able to save those closest to him, and when he is at first unable to swear his Fourth Ideal, Syl is very supportive of him. Because she wants to understand Kaladin better, she goes to Dalinar and asks him to Connect her to Kaladin so she can feel what he feels; he doesn't do exactly what she was expecting, but in remembering her former Knight Syl does begin to feel grief and other shades of sorrow that help her understand Kaladin's depression. Family \n Lirin \nKaladin and his father were originally very close, and he trained him in all of the minutia of surgery and medicine. Lirin was very proud of how quickly Kaladin learned, and wanted him to devote his life to becoming a surgeon. He believed that he could some day surpass him in skill. Despite their rather positive relationship, the two often got into fights about the value of soldiers and of surgeons. These debates often resulted in Lirin getting angry at his son for his idolization of the military and his belief in Alethi jingoism. He attempted to instill in Kaladin his own sense of pacifism, and fundamentally disagreed with the idea that one can take lives in order to protect others. Even in his time as a slave and soldier, he still looked at his father as a true man of honor, the most honorable man he has ever known."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 71, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0017f13a-088e-4170-bf7f-02420e436610'}, page_content='Kaladin - He respects how he healed even those that hated him, which would likely have come to helped shape his Third Ideal. He still holds tightly to many of his teachings.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 71, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0017f13a-088e-4170-bf7f-02420e436610'}, page_content="Kaladin - After they reunited, their relationship became immediately strained. Lirin was heartbroken by how his son, despite everything that he had taught him, had become a soldier and a killer. He thinks of what had happened as being like the military system taking his son away from him. Tien \nKaladin's younger brother, due to the difference in nahn between his family and the rest of the town Kaladin had no real friends growing up and instead would spend time with Tien. As a result the two of them became extremely close with Tien being the only one who could cheer Kaladin up when he became depressed, especially during the Weeping. He is also very protective of his brother as shown when he effortlessly ignored his fathers pleas and threw away his chance at training in Kharbranth. In the end, Tien's death scarred him to the point where he spent the whole next year practicing with the spear to escape his pain, to the point where it nearly killed him even. Years later, Kaladin still feels remorse because of his inability to help Tien. He forces himself to relive his grief every time someone close to him is killed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 71, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0017f13a-088e-4170-bf7f-02420e436610'}, page_content="Kaladin - This causes him to develop a serious case of depression, to the point that he actually jumps off of the Radiant City, Urithiru. Wit \nWit and Kaladin's relationship is strange but positive; they've only met and had serious conversations a few times but each time Wit has taken the effort to give Kaladin some needed emotional support and reinforcement, thus far by telling him a story that goads Kaladin into some sort of growth (despite Wit's protests that the stories have no inherent meaning and anything Kaladin gets out of them is entirely up to Kaladin). Wit generally spares Kaladin his barbs and mockery, and treats him more kindly than most. Kaladin seems to enjoy the encounters with him and even asked for a story in when they meet in his nightmare, something Wit says people almost never do."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Adolin Kholin', 'order': 72, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fe821c83-2311-46bc-a653-686d320f3acb'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Adolin Kholin \n\nKaladin first sees Adolin saving a darkeyed prostitute who is being harassed by some lighteyed officers. Despite this, Kaladin, due to his past interactions with lighteyes, marks it up as an act. Their relationship sours even more when they next meet face-to-face, with Kaladin seeing Adolin as spoiled and arrogant and Adolin disliking Kaladin's condescending attitude and willingness to order those clearly above him in rank. Their interactions manifest in glares and taunts with each only tolerating the other out of necessity. This changes when Kaladin, at a suicidal disadvantage, aids Adolin in a battle against four other Shardbearers. After the duel, while the king offers a boon to Adolin, Kaladin unknowingly embarrasses Elhokar by demanding a Right of Challenge to face Amaram in the arena, resulting in his incarceration. This only further convinces Kaladin that lighteyes can't be trusted. Upon being freed, however, he discovers that Adolin had demanded to be locked up in the same prison, and had refused to be released until Kaladin was pardoned."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Adolin Kholin', 'order': 72, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fe821c83-2311-46bc-a653-686d320f3acb'}, page_content="Kaladin - When questioned why, the prince only says that it wasn't right after Kaladin had saved his life. Adolin then offers Kaladin one of the newly won sets of Shards, though the former bridgeman refuses both, stating that the artifacts had killed too many of his friends for him to want anything to do with them. Confused, the prince instead gives the set to Moash at Kaladin's recommendation. From there the two become good friends, although their friendship is stressed due to their mutual attraction to Shallan Davar. After a while, Shallan and Adolin confess their love to each other and Kaladin gives up on her for good. Throughout their relationship, Adolin notices Kaladin's numerous depressive spirals and helps to break him of them, subtly or not, by forcing Kaladin to spend time around friends and not be alone with his thoughts. Adolin's support of Kaladin is highlighted after Kaladin is relieved of duty as Highmarshal, resulting in Kaladin's depression worsening, and Adolin insists he accompany him to winehouses and various outings."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridge Four', 'order': 73, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '98be8e2b-c7a7-4579-a86b-8640d0a255b4'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Bridge Four \n Drehy \nDrehy was one of the first friends that Kaladin made on Bridge Four, and one of the first people to stand up for him. He was also one of the first men that Kaladin trained in first-aid. While Kaladin does accept his sexuality, he isn't completely bereft of homophobia. He considers Drehy to be unmasculine, and considers Drehy's own beliefs in Vorin gender norms to be funny considering his sexuality. His displays of this prejudice are rare, but when they do occur they clearly make Drehy uncomfortable, and he isn't afraid to speak up about it. Moash \nKaladin and Moash have a very complex relationship that changed in nature drastically over time. In the beginning, they were both members of Bridge Four, but they had a very tense and hostile relationship, with Moash constantly mocking him and challenging his authority as bridge leader. Kaladin often has to resort to forcibly dragging him out of the barracks in order to get him to do his duty. Eventually, they become rather close, despite their occasionally disagreements in philosophy. Their relationship began to turn towards hatred once again once Moash attempted to assassinate Elhokar, and later became a servant of the Fused. It was only further soured by his successful assassination of Elhokar during the Siege of Kholinar. Moash himself has complex views on Kaladin, but all of these feelings can ultimately be boiled down to overwhelming obsession. Teft \nTeft was the first bridgeman Kaladin approaches to ask for support in his plans for Bridge Four after refusing to commit suicide at Honor Chasm, and due to this they developed a very close relationship over time. Teft was also the first to suspect Kaladin's nature as a nascent Knights Radiant. Kaladin worries about Teft's firemoss addiction, and wants to help and support him, but respected his privacy enough to leave him alone until it became a serious problem. Teft's death during the occupation of Urithiru was enough to fully push Kaladin over the edge, leading him to become almost catatonic. Eventually, the despair from losing him led him to attempt suicide again, and actually go through with the attempt."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bridge Four', 'order': 73, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '98be8e2b-c7a7-4579-a86b-8640d0a255b4'}, page_content='Kaladin - Although Dalinar managed to convince him to survive while he was falling, leading to him swearing the Fourth Oath. He still feels a deep grief over his death, and does his best to follow through with the promises he made with Teft, joining in group therapy sessions and working to fix the way that Alethkar deals with mental health. Teft felt a sense of pride at how Kaladin was able to keep fighting no matter what tried to drag him down.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Drehy', 'order': 74, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d6168d6-21c5-4faa-b214-f349f210c426'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Drehy \nDrehy was one of the first friends that Kaladin made on Bridge Four, and one of the first people to stand up for him. He was also one of the first men that Kaladin trained in first-aid. While Kaladin does accept his sexuality, he isn't completely bereft of homophobia. He considers Drehy to be unmasculine, and considers Drehy's own beliefs in Vorin gender norms to be funny considering his sexuality."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Drehy', 'order': 74, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d6168d6-21c5-4faa-b214-f349f210c426'}, page_content="Kaladin - His displays of this prejudice are rare, but when they do occur they clearly make Drehy uncomfortable, and he isn't afraid to speak up about it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Moash', 'order': 75, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '41d1ad45-701a-478b-be3e-a439b3d97300'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Moash \nKaladin and Moash have a very complex relationship that changed in nature drastically over time. In the beginning, they were both members of Bridge Four, but they had a very tense and hostile relationship, with Moash constantly mocking him and challenging his authority as bridge leader. Kaladin often has to resort to forcibly dragging him out of the barracks in order to get him to do his duty. Eventually, they become rather close, despite their occasionally disagreements in philosophy.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Moash', 'order': 75, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '41d1ad45-701a-478b-be3e-a439b3d97300'}, page_content='Kaladin - Their relationship began to turn towards hatred once again once Moash attempted to assassinate Elhokar, and later became a servant of the Fused. It was only further soured by his successful assassination of Elhokar during the Siege of Kholinar. Moash himself has complex views on Kaladin, but all of these feelings can ultimately be boiled down to overwhelming obsession.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Teft', 'order': 76, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7f38e794-50ff-4e00-b4d0-e3588d235d04'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Teft \nTeft was the first bridgeman Kaladin approaches to ask for support in his plans for Bridge Four after refusing to commit suicide at Honor Chasm, and due to this they developed a very close relationship over time. Teft was also the first to suspect Kaladin's nature as a nascent Knights Radiant. Kaladin worries about Teft's firemoss addiction, and wants to help and support him, but respected his privacy enough to leave him alone until it became a serious problem. Teft's death during the occupation of Urithiru was enough to fully push Kaladin over the edge, leading him to become almost catatonic. Eventually, the despair from losing him led him to attempt suicide again, and actually go through with the attempt."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Teft', 'order': 76, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7f38e794-50ff-4e00-b4d0-e3588d235d04'}, page_content='Kaladin - Although Dalinar managed to convince him to survive while he was falling, leading to him swearing the Fourth Oath. He still feels a deep grief over his death, and does his best to follow through with the promises he made with Teft, joining in group therapy sessions and working to fix the way that Alethkar deals with mental health. Teft felt a sense of pride at how Kaladin was able to keep fighting no matter what tried to drag him down.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Shallan Davar', 'order': 77, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd0f5db5e-6e56-4733-b02d-fc295a15c295'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Shallan Davar \nKaladin and Shallan are among the first new Knights Radiant in centuries. They both reveal themselves independently during the Battle of Narak, together serving as the catalyst for the refounding of the order. Kaladin and Shallan initially have a strained relationship. During their first meeting, Shallan tricks Kaladin out of his new boots. During their later meetings, Kaladin suspects Shallan of being a spy or opportunist at worst, and a privileged, unempathetic lighteyes at best. This clash of personalities is reflected in their respective spren, as the Cryptics (to which Shallan's spren Pattern belongs) and honorspren are involved in a complex spren conflict. Later, when Kaladin and Shallan are both stranded in the chasms of the Shattered Plains, they grow to respect and admire one another. During this time, they reveal some of their personal history and secrets to each other, including the fact that Shallan has a Shardblade. Although unsure of their own natures as members of the Knights Radiant, this incident causes them to suspect each other of being more than meets the eye. As time passes, the two of them grow closer together, with Shallan admitting that Veil is attracted to him. In the end, however, she chooses Adolin instead."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Shallan Davar', 'order': 77, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd0f5db5e-6e56-4733-b02d-fc295a15c295'}, page_content='Kaladin - When Syl asks how Kaladin feels about this, he claims that she lifted his burdens a bit and reminded him of Tien (possibly since they were both Lightweavers), but that he never actually loved her.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sylphrena', 'order': 78, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '57ef1c09-e537-4502-8adc-fe851e9fd933'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Sylphrena \nSylphrena, known as Syl, is the honorspren that Kaladin has bonded. Syl is Kaladin\'s constant companion and perhaps his best friend. In addition to providing Kaladin with companionship and guidance, Kaladin\'s bond with Syl is what allows him access to his Surgebinder abilities and to become a member of the Knights Radiant. Syl is also a living weapon and is able to manifest herself as a Shardblade. Syl\'s existence, the Knights Radiant, and Kaladin are linked together. When Kaladin doesn\'t live up to the oaths that he has made as a Knight Radiant, Syl slowly loses intelligence and is eventually "killed." When Kaladin reaffirms his oaths, he is able to revive Syl, although it is implied that there is a way for Kaladin to more permanently kill Syl. Initially, Syl is attracted to Kaladin because of his urge to save others. In this initial stage, she behaves much like a normal windspren, having no sentience.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sylphrena', 'order': 78, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '57ef1c09-e537-4502-8adc-fe851e9fd933'}, page_content="Kaladin - As her bond with Kaladin grows, she gains intelligence, progressing from child-like naivety to understanding complex concepts. She also begins to remember parts of her past; for example, she remembers her own name (and her nickname) when Kaladin asks her if she has a name. She also gains the ability to manifest herself into different forms, initially as things like a ribbon of light, a leaf, and a young woman, and eventually into a Shardblade. Kaladin shares with Syl his regrets of not being able to save those closest to him, and when he is at first unable to swear his Fourth Ideal, Syl is very supportive of him. Because she wants to understand Kaladin better, she goes to Dalinar and asks him to Connect her to Kaladin so she can feel what he feels; he doesn't do exactly what she was expecting, but in remembering her former Knight Syl does begin to feel grief and other shades of sorrow that help her understand Kaladin's depression."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Family', 'order': 79, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1b1bbab1-b2ee-46a4-b768-a35032290aee'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Family \n Lirin \nKaladin and his father were originally very close, and he trained him in all of the minutia of surgery and medicine. Lirin was very proud of how quickly Kaladin learned, and wanted him to devote his life to becoming a surgeon. He believed that he could some day surpass him in skill. Despite their rather positive relationship, the two often got into fights about the value of soldiers and of surgeons. These debates often resulted in Lirin getting angry at his son for his idolization of the military and his belief in Alethi jingoism. He attempted to instill in Kaladin his own sense of pacifism, and fundamentally disagreed with the idea that one can take lives in order to protect others. Even in his time as a slave and soldier, he still looked at his father as a true man of honor, the most honorable man he has ever known. He respects how he healed even those that hated him, which would likely have come to helped shape his Third Ideal. He still holds tightly to many of his teachings.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Family', 'order': 79, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1b1bbab1-b2ee-46a4-b768-a35032290aee'}, page_content="Kaladin - After they reunited, their relationship became immediately strained. Lirin was heartbroken by how his son, despite everything that he had taught him, had become a soldier and a killer. He thinks of what had happened as being like the military system taking his son away from him. Tien \nKaladin's younger brother, due to the difference in nahn between his family and the rest of the town Kaladin had no real friends growing up and instead would spend time with Tien. As a result the two of them became extremely close with Tien being the only one who could cheer Kaladin up when he became depressed, especially during the Weeping. He is also very protective of his brother as shown when he effortlessly ignored his fathers pleas and threw away his chance at training in Kharbranth. In the end, Tien's death scarred him to the point where he spent the whole next year practicing with the spear to escape his pain, to the point where it nearly killed him even. Years later, Kaladin still feels remorse because of his inability to help Tien. He forces himself to relive his grief every time someone close to him is killed. This causes him to develop a serious case of depression, to the point that he actually jumps off of the Radiant City, Urithiru."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Lirin', 'order': 80, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '21ff593b-4d86-4ff6-80d1-7942e372b24a'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Lirin \nKaladin and his father were originally very close, and he trained him in all of the minutia of surgery and medicine. Lirin was very proud of how quickly Kaladin learned, and wanted him to devote his life to becoming a surgeon. He believed that he could some day surpass him in skill. Despite their rather positive relationship, the two often got into fights about the value of soldiers and of surgeons. These debates often resulted in Lirin getting angry at his son for his idolization of the military and his belief in Alethi jingoism. He attempted to instill in Kaladin his own sense of pacifism, and fundamentally disagreed with the idea that one can take lives in order to protect others. Even in his time as a slave and soldier, he still looked at his father as a true man of honor, the most honorable man he has ever known. He respects how he healed even those that hated him, which would likely have come to helped shape his Third Ideal. He still holds tightly to many of his teachings.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Lirin', 'order': 80, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '21ff593b-4d86-4ff6-80d1-7942e372b24a'}, page_content='Kaladin - After they reunited, their relationship became immediately strained. Lirin was heartbroken by how his son, despite everything that he had taught him, had become a soldier and a killer. He thinks of what had happened as being like the military system taking his son away from him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Tien', 'order': 81, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '655aeb48-bbd1-46cc-a5d6-c7aac865801b'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Tien \nKaladin's younger brother, due to the difference in nahn between his family and the rest of the town Kaladin had no real friends growing up and instead would spend time with Tien. As a result the two of them became extremely close with Tien being the only one who could cheer Kaladin up when he became depressed, especially during the Weeping. He is also very protective of his brother as shown when he effortlessly ignored his fathers pleas and threw away his chance at training in Kharbranth. In the end, Tien's death scarred him to the point where he spent the whole next year practicing with the spear to escape his pain, to the point where it nearly killed him even. Years later, Kaladin still feels remorse because of his inability to help Tien. He forces himself to relive his grief every time someone close to him is killed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Tien', 'order': 81, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '655aeb48-bbd1-46cc-a5d6-c7aac865801b'}, page_content='Kaladin - This causes him to develop a serious case of depression, to the point that he actually jumps off of the Radiant City, Urithiru.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Wit', 'order': 82, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2407e347-4dd1-4de1-b2c8-473087a08c46'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Wit \nWit and Kaladin's relationship is strange but positive; they've only met and had serious conversations a few times but each time Wit has taken the effort to give Kaladin some needed emotional support and reinforcement, thus far by telling him a story that goads Kaladin into some sort of growth (despite Wit's protests that the stories have no inherent meaning and anything Kaladin gets out of them is entirely up to Kaladin). Wit generally spares Kaladin his barbs and mockery, and treats him more kindly than most."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Wit', 'order': 82, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2407e347-4dd1-4de1-b2c8-473087a08c46'}, page_content='Kaladin - Kaladin seems to enjoy the encounters with him and even asked for a story in when they meet in his nightmare, something Wit says people almost never do.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Development', 'order': 83, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '10791cb7-33a8-40a4-8024-04753a259168'}, page_content="Kaladin -  Development \n\nKaladin's precursor in the Stormlight Archive was Merin, a character Brandon came up with in the year 2000. In the original draft for The Way of Kings, The Way of Kings Prime, Merin wins a Shardblade after defending Elhokar on the field of battle."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Development', 'order': 83, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '10791cb7-33a8-40a4-8024-04753a259168'}, page_content="Kaladin - Much like Kaladin, Merin is of low social rank (it's unclear if the concept of eye color denoting social status was already present). As such, there are people who don't wish to him to have the Shards; however, at the insistence of Dalenar (proto-Dalinar), Merin is made a Shardbearer and adopted into House Kholin. However, Brandon was very dissatisfied with Merin's character, feeling as though there was nothing interesting to him after he accepted the Shardblade. As such, he set out to add more personality to him. The surgeon backstory came first, followed by the personal tragedy of losing a family member and the decision to have Merin deny the Shardblades, with all consequences thereof. Finally, Brandon decided to give the character depression to round him out. Overall, it took about eight years for Merin to evolve. The Shattered Plains plot, originally of Dragonsteel Prime, was moved to Roshar partially to assist in that, giving more context to Merin's slavery. Merin's name was up for change for a while at this point, as it sounded too much like Perrin. Moreover, this new character felt too different to be still called Merin, and Brandon wanted this new protagonist to have a new, more mythic-sounding name; thus, Kaladin was born."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Quotes', 'order': 84, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd9c7e882-ca8b-47f6-b0e7-956b3a0ca897'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Quotes '), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 85, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c9f513c8-eed3-437d-8e86-9c64cb4dfaa9'}, page_content='Kaladin -  Trivia \n Kaladin is currently immune to the Thrill, although he may have felt it in the past. Kaladin spoke the Second Ideal of the Windrunners in modern Alethi.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 85, 'parent_article': 'Kaladin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c9f513c8-eed3-437d-8e86-9c64cb4dfaa9'}, page_content='Kaladin - At some points Brandon wanted to have a second flashback book for Kaladin, but the plan has since changed, with each of the ten Stormlight Archive books having a different flashback character. Kaladin\'s name comes from the combining of the name Kalak and the Alethi suffix \'din\'. His name means \'born unto eternity\'. Kaladin and ex-queen Aesudan Kholin are distantly related, through Hesina. Kaladin\'s physical appearance is modelled off someone with mixed Japanese and Pacific Islander heritage, although Kaladin could also be mistaken as someone who has mixed Japanese/Middle Eastern ancestry. Kaladin is most likely a Hufflepuff. Kaladin is referred to as "Child of Tanavast" and "The Son of Tanavast" by the Stormfather, while many other characters are called "Child of Honor". There is a reason for this. During the events of Rhythm of War, Kaladin was as close as it was humanly possible to be to the fourth Ideal, without having sworn it. This, along with how much he exemplified Windrunner-hood, allowed him to resist the effects of the partially corrupted Sibling\'s influence.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Pits of Hathsin', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Pits of Hathsin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b503560e-54b7-4057-b870-888cc275c313'}, page_content='Pits of Hathsin - The Pits of Hathsin are a system of caves near Luthadel on Scadrial at the time of the Final Empire in which atium geodes grow.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Geography', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Pits of Hathsin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '46fc72cb-1a7d-47dc-b6be-d158e7b32fdd'}, page_content='Pits of Hathsin -  Geography \nThe Pits are known to the people of the Final Empire only as a deadly skaa labor camp the Lord Ruler set up, but it actually also produces atium crystals. It serves the dual purpose of punishing skaa criminals and concealing the location of the atium mines, as the prisoners cannot leave.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Geography', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Pits of Hathsin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '46fc72cb-1a7d-47dc-b6be-d158e7b32fdd'}, page_content='Pits of Hathsin - During the events of the Final Empire, the Pits of Hathsin are the only known place where atium can be mined. Imprisoned skaa are required to climb down a suffocatingly narrow gorge and reach into crystal-lined niches to find the geodes that contain the atium. Each skaa has to find an atium geode every week; if they fail, they are savagely beaten to death. The Pits are also the location of a Perpendicularity that is the liquid form of Ruin, as the Well of Ascension is to Preservation. The Pits of Hathsin were used for interplanetary trade by worldhoppers, which Rashek was aware of.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Pits of Hathsin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b1e6c9cf-e56e-43cd-8532-ea863ddd24f1'}, page_content='Pits of Hathsin -  History \nKelsier is the first known person to survive imprisonment in the Pits. This feat gains him the title, "The Survivor of Hathsin". He is forced into labor there along with his wife Mare as punishment for attempting to infiltrate and rob the Lord Ruler\'s palace, Kredik Shaw. After Mare dies in the Pits, Kelsier Snaps and escapes using his newfound abilities as a Mistborn. Several days before the fall of the Final Empire, Kelsier returns to the Pits. There, he sets free the enslaved skaa prisoners and proceeds to destroy the majority of Hathsin\'s atium-producing crystals using allomancy. His iron is enough to detect trace amounts of atium in the crystals, and Pulling on them shatters the crystals with kinetic force. Afterwards, he remarks that his actions will likely end atium production in the Final Empire for the next three hundred years, as the crystals will need time to regrow before any more atium can be mined. After the Collapse of the Final Empire and the end of the atium mining, the Pits in the Central Dominance become the new home of the Terris people, as the remaining infrastructure from the old mining camp have buildings, shelters, and most importantly, fresh water along with farm crops of resilient hardy plants adapted to ash that need little water. Once settled, the Terris people improve the valley, building more structures, brushing ash from the plant foliage to provide grazing for the adapted short-legged sheep that roamed the hills, and returning to their heritage of herding, before the Lord Ruler\'s Ascension. The Terris people\'s lives become easier than most on Scadrial, living in pastoral villages that replace the once brutal prison camps. After the events of the Final Ascension, atium is no longer formed within the crystals of the Pits; the atium may or may not regrow in the future.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Pits of Hathsin', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b1e6c9cf-e56e-43cd-8532-ea863ddd24f1'}, page_content="Pits of Hathsin - The atium does not grow at Wax's time. However, it is possible that Harmony is doing something to reduce Ruin's power to balance out the extra power that Preservation Invested in humankind. By this time, the Pits are also sometimes known as the Survivor's Cradle for its role in Kelsier's Snapping."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Allomancy', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0a64df63-d20a-478e-a2c2-4288c0804c97'}, page_content='Allomancy - Allomancy is the most widely used form of Investiture on Scadrial, and is locally known as one of the three Metallic Arts. People who have one or more Allomantic abilities are called Allomancers with each Allomantic power being paired with a type of metal, which must be ingested and "burned" to activate.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Mechanics', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '185296ef-b5e2-4dd3-9f71-965ff7295c0c'}, page_content='Allomancy -  Mechanics \n\nAllomancy is an End-Positive magic system, which draws on the power of Preservation, channeled through a metal when it is burned. This differs to how Feruchemy works, as Allomancy is not being powered by the body of the Allomancer, but instead by an external force. Like the other Metallic Arts, Allomancy as a magic system formed through the natural interactions between the two Shards that inhabit Scadrial, Preservation and Ruin, and the planet itself, instead of being created by a specific Shard. This magic system, however, is generally tailored and fuelled by Preservation, although specific cases will involve an Allomancer drawing upon Ruin\'s essence instead. Like other forms of Investiture, Allomancy does not necessarily reflect the intent of the Shard which it is associated with. Allomantic metals are the focus, but not the source, of Allomancy\'s power. When an Allomancer burns a metal, that metal\'s specific molecular structure acts as a conduit to Preservation, and then the Allomancer is granted an ability corresponding to the metal, allowing the metal to "focus" Preservation\'s power to the user. Each metal is the only way a mortal can access Preservation and the power of creation, after which it is vaporized. However, this is only true for the base sixteen Allomantic metals and not God Metals or their alloys. Allomancers feel a reserve of power in their stomach when they have ingested a metal they can burn. The metals are usually ingested by drinking specifically prepared metal vials, which contain metal flakes suspended in an alcohol solution or other such liquid, e.g.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Mechanics', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '185296ef-b5e2-4dd3-9f71-965ff7295c0c'}, page_content='Allomancy - cod oil. While swallowing metal is the most common way of getting metal into the body, other ways such as injecting or snorting will also work. When using their powers, many Allomancers describe a warm feeling in the stomach, hence the term "burning metal". An Allomancer can also burn their metals at an accelerated rate, which is called "flaring." Flaring grants more power, but the reserve of metals depletes much faster, too. Allomancers can burn metals from any planet in the cosmere. This is due to the presence of Preservation in the Spiritual Realm. Allomancers can suffer side-effects from leaving metal in their bodies for too long, and they normally burn their remaining ingested metals before sleeping to avoid this. Despite this, due to their physiology, Allomancers are generally immune to metal poisoning. They are not immune to metal allergies, however. Advanced Allomancy can be combined with Feruchemy to gain faster-than-light travel. It is possible to use Allomancy in the Cognitive Realm. Burning metals containing BioChromatic Breath has no effect on the Allomancy, although if the Breath belongs to the Allomancer it will be regained. If an Allomancer burns an Invested metal which is Allomantically inert, it will not have any special effect apart from possibly killing the Allomancer. Allomancers will still feel a reserve of power in their stomach from badly mixed alloys, and burning them will make them sick, giving them a blinding headache. Gaining Allomantic Abilities \nAllomancy is a spiritually hereditary trait, that does not follow the same principles of dominant and recessive physical genetics. Scadrians with mixed skaa-noble heritage generally must have a noble in the previous five generations in order to be born an Allomancer. The ability lays dormant until an Allomancer undergoes Snapping, which will activate their Allomantic abilities. The abilities can be used instinctually, including while unconscious, once awakened if the user is to ingest the correct type of metal, though training is required to use these powers well. Snapping does not affect the chances of having an Allomancer child. Twins are more likely to have the same metal, especially if they are identical instead of fraternal. It is possible to gain Allomancy through the use of Hemalurgic spikes where the spiritual DNA associated with Allomancy is transferred from one soul to another. If an Allomancer attempts to burn a Hemalurgic spike, the Allomancer\'s spiritual DNA will be spliced to that of the person\'s contained in the spike. The consequences of this are as of yet unknown. Additionally, consuming a bead of lerasium will hardcode Allomancy into a person\'s spiritweb and grant them Allomantic abilities. The size of the bead that is consumed is proportional to the strength of their Allomancy. Snapping \nIn the Final Empire, children of confirmed noble bloodlines often undergo a planned beating as a test to see if they Snap, as Snapping commonly occurs when a Misting or Mistborn undergoes heavy stress and pain, often in a near-death situation, causing them to trigger latent Allomantic abilities. According to Realmatic Theory, this creates a crack on the soul which the power can fit into. There are some similarities on this to other magic systems, such as the Knights Radiant all being "broken" as indicated by Syl. It was possible for Allomancers to Snap from intense positive emotion, but this is much less common. It is also possible to Snap from false emotions, caused by Soothing and Rioting. It was said that the more powerful the Allomancer, the more intense the trauma had to be to Snap. After the Final Ascension, Harmony changed the way Snapping operated, but it is unknown how it was altered. After an Allomancer has Snapped, they will have access to their full power, and do not have to build to reach their full potential such as with Surgebinding. Mist Sickness \nIn the run up to the Catacendre, however, the mists cause sickness in people, triggering their own Snapping; this process is started by Preservation, but is manipulated by Ruin into killing people, thus raising superstitions about the mists being dangerous. The length a person has "mist sickness" relates to their Allomantic powers and abilities. The most powerful atium mistings are sick for the longest time. During the time the mists are Snapping people in The Hero of Ages, they also raise the Allomantic potential of the people they Snap so that exactly 16% are Snapped. The number is a hint left by Preservation for humans to understand.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Mechanics', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '185296ef-b5e2-4dd3-9f71-965ff7295c0c'}, page_content='Allomancy - Savantism \nAllomancers who flare their metal intensely for extended periods of time may be physiologically altered by the constant influx of Allomantic power.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Mechanics', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '185296ef-b5e2-4dd3-9f71-965ff7295c0c'}, page_content='Allomancy - These people are known as Allomantic savants. These people experience heightened ability with, and heightened dependence upon, whatever metal they are burning in such a manner. Under most circumstances, this was considered irreversibly damaging.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Gaining Allomantic Abilities', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4295d2dd-a11f-4346-b4f5-0d0cd34271d8'}, page_content='Allomancy -  Gaining Allomantic Abilities \nAllomancy is a spiritually hereditary trait, that does not follow the same principles of dominant and recessive physical genetics. Scadrians with mixed skaa-noble heritage generally must have a noble in the previous five generations in order to be born an Allomancer. The ability lays dormant until an Allomancer undergoes Snapping, which will activate their Allomantic abilities.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Gaining Allomantic Abilities', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4295d2dd-a11f-4346-b4f5-0d0cd34271d8'}, page_content="Allomancy - The abilities can be used instinctually, including while unconscious, once awakened if the user is to ingest the correct type of metal, though training is required to use these powers well. Snapping does not affect the chances of having an Allomancer child. Twins are more likely to have the same metal, especially if they are identical instead of fraternal. It is possible to gain Allomancy through the use of Hemalurgic spikes where the spiritual DNA associated with Allomancy is transferred from one soul to another. If an Allomancer attempts to burn a Hemalurgic spike, the Allomancer's spiritual DNA will be spliced to that of the person's contained in the spike. The consequences of this are as of yet unknown. Additionally, consuming a bead of lerasium will hardcode Allomancy into a person's spiritweb and grant them Allomantic abilities."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Gaining Allomantic Abilities', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4295d2dd-a11f-4346-b4f5-0d0cd34271d8'}, page_content='Allomancy - The size of the bead that is consumed is proportional to the strength of their Allomancy. Snapping \nIn the Final Empire, children of confirmed noble bloodlines often undergo a planned beating as a test to see if they Snap, as Snapping commonly occurs when a Misting or Mistborn undergoes heavy stress and pain, often in a near-death situation, causing them to trigger latent Allomantic abilities. According to Realmatic Theory, this creates a crack on the soul which the power can fit into. There are some similarities on this to other magic systems, such as the Knights Radiant all being "broken" as indicated by Syl. It was possible for Allomancers to Snap from intense positive emotion, but this is much less common. It is also possible to Snap from false emotions, caused by Soothing and Rioting. It was said that the more powerful the Allomancer, the more intense the trauma had to be to Snap. After the Final Ascension, Harmony changed the way Snapping operated, but it is unknown how it was altered. After an Allomancer has Snapped, they will have access to their full power, and do not have to build to reach their full potential such as with Surgebinding. Mist Sickness \nIn the run up to the Catacendre, however, the mists cause sickness in people, triggering their own Snapping; this process is started by Preservation, but is manipulated by Ruin into killing people, thus raising superstitions about the mists being dangerous. The length a person has "mist sickness" relates to their Allomantic powers and abilities. The most powerful atium mistings are sick for the longest time. During the time the mists are Snapping people in The Hero of Ages, they also raise the Allomantic potential of the people they Snap so that exactly 16% are Snapped. The number is a hint left by Preservation for humans to understand.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Snapping', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f5d8c1e5-a3c8-4b9a-afce-3d267b36f54f'}, page_content='Allomancy -  Snapping \nIn the Final Empire, children of confirmed noble bloodlines often undergo a planned beating as a test to see if they Snap, as Snapping commonly occurs when a Misting or Mistborn undergoes heavy stress and pain, often in a near-death situation, causing them to trigger latent Allomantic abilities. According to Realmatic Theory, this creates a crack on the soul which the power can fit into. There are some similarities on this to other magic systems, such as the Knights Radiant all being "broken" as indicated by Syl.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Snapping', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f5d8c1e5-a3c8-4b9a-afce-3d267b36f54f'}, page_content='Allomancy - It was possible for Allomancers to Snap from intense positive emotion, but this is much less common. It is also possible to Snap from false emotions, caused by Soothing and Rioting. It was said that the more powerful the Allomancer, the more intense the trauma had to be to Snap. After the Final Ascension, Harmony changed the way Snapping operated, but it is unknown how it was altered. After an Allomancer has Snapped, they will have access to their full power, and do not have to build to reach their full potential such as with Surgebinding.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Mist Sickness', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '95639d41-771d-48bf-a599-1f9f4e52e151'}, page_content='Allomancy -  Mist Sickness \nIn the run up to the Catacendre, however, the mists cause sickness in people, triggering their own Snapping; this process is started by Preservation, but is manipulated by Ruin into killing people, thus raising superstitions about the mists being dangerous. The length a person has "mist sickness" relates to their Allomantic powers and abilities. The most powerful atium mistings are sick for the longest time. During the time the mists are Snapping people in The Hero of Ages, they also raise the Allomantic potential of the people they Snap so that exactly 16% are Snapped.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Mist Sickness', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '95639d41-771d-48bf-a599-1f9f4e52e151'}, page_content='Allomancy - The number is a hint left by Preservation for humans to understand.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Savantism', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '04042c7b-05de-41f8-86a3-a8fd4d9282c0'}, page_content='Allomancy -  Savantism \nAllomancers who flare their metal intensely for extended periods of time may be physiologically altered by the constant influx of Allomantic power. These people are known as Allomantic savants.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Savantism', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '04042c7b-05de-41f8-86a3-a8fd4d9282c0'}, page_content='Allomancy - These people experience heightened ability with, and heightened dependence upon, whatever metal they are burning in such a manner. Under most circumstances, this was considered irreversibly damaging.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Types of Allomancers', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '36e79f59-1e5c-4bdc-bd02-a6b5b6e23961'}, page_content="Allomancy -  Types of Allomancers \n\nAllomancers are categorized based on if they can burn a single metal, Misting, or if they can burn all metals, Mistborn, with Hemalurgy being the only known way to access a combination powers that falls outside of this categorizations structure. Each type of Misting was given a particular name depending on their ability, such as Lurcher, Coinshot, or Soother. An Allomancer's lineage does not usually play a factor in which kind of Misting they are. Throughout the ages, the strength of an Allomancer has slowly decreased, weakening a bit with each generation."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Types of Allomancers', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '36e79f59-1e5c-4bdc-bd02-a6b5b6e23961'}, page_content='Allomancy - This dilution of power eventually caps and cannot decrease any further; there was no apparent power dilution between Era 1 and Era 2, and it was confirmed that the dilution has completely capped by Era 3. People who use lerasium can gain the strength of ancient, powerful Allomancers. Twinborn and Compounders \nAfter the Final Empire, Terris and those of noble descent began to interbreed, so it became possible for their descendants to have one Allomantic ability and one Feruchemical ability. People with such powers were called Twinborn. Like Mistings, Twinborn were each given a name depending on their specific combination of abilities. The interaction between the two abilities creates a new, secondary effect, known as a Resonance. A Compounder is a special type of Twinborn--a person who uses the same metal for both their Allomantic and Feruchemical abilities. A Compounder can Allomantically burn their Feruchemically charged metalmind, gaining a massive burst of the stored Feruchemical attribute. Compounders were considered immensely powerful. Though the term "Compounding" first appeared in Scadrian vocabulary after the Final Empire, perhaps the most famous Compounder was the Lord Ruler himself--by constantly Compounding atium, pewter, and gold, he was eternally young, supernaturally strong, and basically unkillable.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Twinborn and Compounders', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fa5efcda-6f23-4c65-a9dd-768a36102121'}, page_content='Allomancy -  Twinborn and Compounders \nAfter the Final Empire, Terris and those of noble descent began to interbreed, so it became possible for their descendants to have one Allomantic ability and one Feruchemical ability. People with such powers were called Twinborn. Like Mistings, Twinborn were each given a name depending on their specific combination of abilities.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Twinborn and Compounders', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fa5efcda-6f23-4c65-a9dd-768a36102121'}, page_content='Allomancy - The interaction between the two abilities creates a new, secondary effect, known as a Resonance. A Compounder is a special type of Twinborn--a person who uses the same metal for both their Allomantic and Feruchemical abilities. A Compounder can Allomantically burn their Feruchemically charged metalmind, gaining a massive burst of the stored Feruchemical attribute. Compounders were considered immensely powerful. Though the term "Compounding" first appeared in Scadrian vocabulary after the Final Empire, perhaps the most famous Compounder was the Lord Ruler himself--by constantly Compounding atium, pewter, and gold, he was eternally young, supernaturally strong, and basically unkillable.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Allomantic Metals', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1dd6f078-000d-4446-8772-8c7082a4f6ec'}, page_content='Allomancy -  Allomantic Metals \n\nThe following is the modern Table of Allomantic Metals, from some point after the Catacendre. There are sixteen basic Allomantic metals. The metals come in pairs: one metal is a periodic element, while the other is the alloy of that base metal.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Allomantic Metals', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1dd6f078-000d-4446-8772-8c7082a4f6ec'}, page_content='Allomancy - These pairs have complementary effects. Iron Pulls on nearby metals, while its alloy, steel, Pushes on metals. Similarly, each elemental metal is classified as a "Pulling" ability, whereas each alloy is classified as a "Pushing" ability. The purity of the metal corresponds to its effectiveness and alloys require precise compound percentages for maximum power. Burning an impure alloy may cause sickness, while metals that are not Allomantically viable cannot be burned after being ingested. In addition to Pulling and Pushing classifications, there are external and internal metals. External powers influence things outside an Allomancer\'s body, while internal powers influence the Allomancer. This naturally divides the sixteen Allomantic metals into four groups of four metals each: physical, mental, temporal, and enhancement powers. Each quadrant has a metal and alloy pair of an external power, and another pair of internal powers. The Allomantic effects of metals are most similar to the effects of fabrials on Roshar. Steel and Iron also have corresponding effects in how they affect Aether, whether other allomantic metals also have effects or not is currently unknown. God Metals \nGod Metals do not fit in the modern Allomantic Table, and Scadrians appear to only know of the metals that correspond to the Scadrian Shards; lerasium, atium, and harmonium, the last of which could only be burned theoretically, as it explodes upon contact with liquids. Unlike the standard Allomantic metals, which are regular metal elements and compounds, God Metals are a condensed, solid form of pure Investiture. Alloys of God Metals can lead to additional abilities. God MetalsMetalShardEffect Atium Ruin Reveals others\' future Pure Atium Ruin Gives an expanded vision of the future  Malatium Ruin See into another person\'s past Atium Alloys Ruin Various expanded mental and temporal effects Lerasium Preservation Turns one into a Mistborn or increases one\'s Allomantic power Lerasium Alloys Preservation Creation of Mistings, various expanded physical and enhancement effects Harmonium Harmony Unknown Trellium Autonomy Unknown Raysium Odium Unknown'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'God Metals', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e6c074d7-0d7c-4d50-baf9-e482faf26ea1'}, page_content='Allomancy -  God Metals \nGod Metals do not fit in the modern Allomantic Table, and Scadrians appear to only know of the metals that correspond to the Scadrian Shards; lerasium, atium, and harmonium, the last of which could only be burned theoretically, as it explodes upon contact with liquids. Unlike the standard Allomantic metals, which are regular metal elements and compounds, God Metals are a condensed, solid form of pure Investiture.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'God Metals', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e6c074d7-0d7c-4d50-baf9-e482faf26ea1'}, page_content="Allomancy - Alloys of God Metals can lead to additional abilities. God MetalsMetalShardEffect Atium Ruin Reveals others' future Pure Atium Ruin Gives an expanded vision of the future  Malatium Ruin See into another person's past Atium Alloys Ruin Various expanded mental and temporal effects Lerasium Preservation Turns one into a Mistborn or increases one's Allomantic power Lerasium Alloys Preservation Creation of Mistings, various expanded physical and enhancement effects Harmonium Harmony Unknown Trellium Autonomy Unknown Raysium Odium Unknown"), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5e162b42-f0a9-46c1-8eb1-655bed461252'}, page_content="Allomancy -  History \nAt some point, Preservation altered Allomancy to insert Ruin's God Metal, atium, instead of one of the other metals in order to execute his plan to defeat Ruin using atium Mistings. The Shard's plan eventually came to fruition during the Battle of Hathsin when Elend's army consumed a large proportion of the existing atium, preventing Ruin from accessing his full power. Prior to the Ascension of the Lord Ruler, Allomancy was rarely found among the general population."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5e162b42-f0a9-46c1-8eb1-655bed461252'}, page_content="Allomancy - The Lord Ruler's Ascension, and his subsequent distribution of the lerasium beads, increased the strength of the Allomantic spiritual DNA in the Final Empire, which had long lasting effects through the subsequent generations. Rashek, and his Steel Ministry, also suppressed knowledge of several of the Allomantic metals, so that only the four physical, four mental, gold, and atium, were known of by the general populace. Malatium became known through legend as The Eleventh Metal, a rumor that may have been started by Ruin to help facilitate the downfall of the Lord Ruler. Prior to its destruction, atium and malatium were incorrectly classified as temporal metals instead of God Metals by The Lord Ruler and his government. Following the Final Ascension, Harmony altered Snapping to act differently. The Allomantic Table also changed at this time to remove Ruin's metals, with advances in technology also making cadmium, bendalloy, chromium, and nicrosil more available."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Notable Allomancers', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '59570248-ab0e-47cc-96b8-bc3911d53268'}, page_content='Allomancy -  Notable Allomancers '), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Development', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5e9a2f31-d4e1-42f7-840a-74808636a359'}, page_content='Allomancy -  Development \nAllomancy was present in the original version of Mistborn (now known as Mistborn Prime). In that version, Allomancy only had Mistborn and no Mistings. Mistborn Prime was never published, and Brandon later repurposed its good ideas into Mistborn: The Final Empire. To give this new Mistborn book a heist novel feel, Brandon added Mistings, so that he could have a team of specialists with their own unique strengths. The metals themselves changed over time. Brandon had been misled by employees of a hobby shop in his childhood that pewter was an alloy of silver, so in the original draft of Mistborn, silver and pewter were paired, and he named silver Mistings Silvereyes. When he realized the factual error, he was forced to change it to tin and Tineye.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Development', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5e9a2f31-d4e1-42f7-840a-74808636a359'}, page_content='Allomancy - Brandon always thought Silvereye sounded much "slicker" than Tineye. And so silver just happened to not have any Allomantic effect in the final form of Allomancy. After the original trilogy and Brandon\'s reveal that atium and malatium did not belong on the true Table of Allomantic Metals, Brandon chose the true external temporal metal to be cadmium, as it was particularly dangerous and hard to acquire, so it made sense that only Scadrians with the technology after the Final Ascension could discover it. Brandon originally had cadmium\'s alloy named cerrobend, but that name happened to be trademarked, so Brandon was forced to change it to the generic word, bendalloy. The error was present on an early version of the Table of Allomantic Metals.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'External links', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Allomancy', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '32276c7a-afd6-4010-bbf0-3cf4bb9e0b47'}, page_content='Allomancy -  External links \nMistborn Adventure Game (Crafty Games)\nAllomantic Metals Poster'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cosmere', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '37ed3580-1161-40cc-af8d-186d2866c500'}, page_content="Cosmere - The cosmere is a fictional shared universe where many of Brandon Sanderson's books take place. As a result, books set in the cosmere share a single cosmology and underlying rules of magic, and some characters from one world will make appearances on other worlds. Despite the connections, Brandon has remained clear that one does not need any knowledge of the broader cosmere to read, understand, or enjoy books that take place in the cosmere. The core sequence of the cosmere will consist of the Dragonsteel series, the Elantris trilogy, at least four eras of the Mistborn series, and The Stormlight Archive. The story of the cosmere does not include any books that reference Earth, as Earth is not in the cosmere."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cosmere', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '37ed3580-1161-40cc-af8d-186d2866c500'}, page_content='Cosmere - For a complete list of books in the cosmere, see the bibliography section below. The shared "creation myth" of the cosmere revolves around Adonalsium, the power of creation, which was broken into sixteen pieces called Shards in an event known as the Shattering of Adonalsium. The Shards are effectively gods, and magic is derived from their power.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Properties and Forces', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '78a0ea2e-f49e-4f5d-b11e-b663076dc25c'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Properties and Forces \n\n Realms \n\nIn the cosmere, everything exists in three Realms: the Physical Realm, the Cognitive Realm, and the Spiritual Realm. The three Realms have existed since the beginning of the cosmere. When someone in the cosmere dies, their body remains in the Physical Realm and a Cognitive Shadow forms in the Cognitive Realm. For most people, this Cognitive Shadow quickly moves on to the Beyond and their Investiture returns to the Spiritual Realm. The more Investiture someone held in life, the longer they can linger before being drawn to the Beyond, but only Slivers—those who once held a significant portion of a Shard's power—can resist the Beyond forever, though they can still choose to go if they so desire. Before the person passes to the Beyond, however, they can still be restored via Investiture healing or be infused with enough Investiture to become a more permanent Cognitive Shadow, usually as a result of a Shard's action. Those killed by Nightblood or anti-Investiture or consumed by Yelig-nar, however, cannot be resurrected in any way, as nothing remains of their soul. Time travel to the past, in any of the Realms, is impossible. The Physical Realm \nIn the Physical Realm, the cosmere is a star cluster of about 50 to 100 stars. The Physical Realm is composed of fundamental particles known as axi and follows ordinary laws of physics, except when the other Realms are involved. Currently, there are sixteen known planetary systems in the cosmere, which contain a total of nineteen notable planets. The cosmere is also home to other celestial objects, including several dwarf planets, gas giants, and constellations. At least one person has tried to leave the physical bounds of the cosmere, with unknown results. The Cognitive Realm \n\nThe Cognitive Realm is closely modeled on the Physical Realm, though there are significant differences. Because the Cognitive Realm is the Realm of thought, it is substantially impacted by how people imagine and perceive ideas. For example, outer space is significantly compressed in the Cognitive Realm, because people do not spend much time thinking about the space between planets. There are also some entities that naturally exist primarily in the Cognitive Realm, such as the spren who personify thoughts, emotions, and natural features, as well as certain Cognitive Shadows. The appearance of the Cognitive Realm around a particular planet seems to reflect salient characteristics of that planet—around Scadrial, for instance, it is composed of mist, while around Roshar it is composed of spheres. Land and water are inverted in the Cognitive Realm—what is solid land in the Physical Realm is unstable ground in the Cognitive, while bodies of water in the Physical are solid in the Cognitive. As a result, physical beings attempting to traverse non-solid regions of the Cognitive Realm risk drowning in whatever composes the local Cognitive Realm, though cognitive entities can traverse these regions safely. The Spiritual Realm \n\nThe Spiritual Realm exists beyond space and time. As such, it is not truly a place, but rather is the Realm of concepts like Intent, Identity, Connection, and Fortune. Everything exists in the Spiritual Realm in its ideal form. Intent is the Spiritual property that expresses a person's considered will or purpose. Intent cannot be formed accidentally; if Intent is required to do something, then the person attempting to do it must not only do it, but mean to do it. Many Invested Arts require their user to act with Intent in order to properly use their magic. Invested entities, like spren, Cognitive Shadows, and even Shards have a fundamental Intent that describes the purpose of the Investiture that constitutes their essence. Indeed, the longer they exist, the more they will become bound by their Intent, unable to act against it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Properties and Forces', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '78a0ea2e-f49e-4f5d-b11e-b663076dc25c'}, page_content='Cosmere - An extreme example of this is Ati, the original Vessel of the Shard Ruin, who was initially a "kind and generous" man, but became so consumed by his Shard\'s Intent that he sought the complete destruction of Scadrial and even viewed it as necessary. Along with Intent, there is also the associated concept of Command.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Properties and Forces', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '78a0ea2e-f49e-4f5d-b11e-b663076dc25c'}, page_content='Cosmere - Commands are more limited than Intent, but they help to focus the Intent so that Investiture can respond appropriately. While most Commands are related to a certain Invested Art or some other specific method of manipulating Investiture, there are also the Dawnshards, four fundamental Commands that were involved in both the creation of the cosmere and the Shattering of Adonalsium. Identity is the Spiritual property that demarcates one person or object from another and describes who or what they are.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Properties and Forces', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '78a0ea2e-f49e-4f5d-b11e-b663076dc25c'}, page_content="Cosmere - Losing their Identity during the False Desolation turned the singers into slaveform. Identity also serves as the lock and key for metalminds; Feruchemists can only withdraw attributes stored by someone with a matching Identity—ordinarily, this means only attributes they stored. Because Identity describes who a person is, it is closely tied to the concept of a spiritweb, which is sometimes called Spiritual DNA. spiritwebs are not entirely understood, but they are quantifiable in some way, and seem to record information about a person's Investiture, such as the genetics that make one an Allomancer. Magical healing in the cosmere usually works by using Investiture to make a person's condition in the Physical Realm more closely match their idealized self in the Spiritual Realm, though this idealized self is filtered through the person's perception of themself in the Cognitive Realm. As a result, healing is usually limited by how a person views themself, and once a person accepts something as part of themself, it will not be able to heal. In addition to containing this information about a person or object's Identity, the Spiritual Realm also stores Connection between people, objects, and even more abstract concepts. For example, a person can form Connection to a region, which will allow them to speak that region's language. In order to take up a Shard after a Vessel dies, a person must be Connected to that Shard. Because the Spiritual Realm exists beyond space and time, it—along with the associated property of Fortune—can be used to see events in other locations or even the future, though this is generally very difficult. Investiture \n\nJust as there is an equivalency between mass and energy, in the cosmere these things can also be exchanged with a magical power known as Investiture. When Investiture is accounted for, the cosmere adheres to the ordinary laws of conservation and thermodynamics. Investiture mostly exists in the Spiritual Realm, though it is more precisely understood as transcending the Realms."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Properties and Forces', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '78a0ea2e-f49e-4f5d-b11e-b663076dc25c'}, page_content='Cosmere - However, it can also exist in a "condensed" form in the Physical Realm as solid, liquid, or gas. If left alone, Investiture will, over time, become self-aware, resulting in a Splinter. Khriss suspects that the land itself on Sel is undergoing a process like this as a result of Devotion and Dominion\'s Investiture being trapped in the Cognitive Realm. More common examples of this process include seons and spren. Investiture has a property that associates it with one of the sixteen Shards of Adonalsium; at the Shattering of Adonalsium, all Investiture was divided evenly between the Shards. Even though, as a result of the Shattering, all Investiture is associated with a Shard, Investiture also remains linked to Adonalsium in some way and the Shattering meant "everything and nothing at the same time" to Investiture. When one form of Investiture attempts to co-opt or corrupt another form of Investiture, it will often produce a red effect. Examples of this include the red smoke given off by Shai\'s soulstamps when she uses them to temporarily tweak Gaotona\'s soul, the red haze of Trell invading Scadrial, and the red coloring of some of the spren Enlightened by Sja-anat. Similarly, when some entity possesses or has a strong influence over a person, the person\'s eyes will often glow red, as seen with the bodies on Scadrial controlled by Autonomy, the soldiers possessed via the Thrill at the Battle of Thaylen Field, and many of Odium\'s servants, whose souls are corrupted by his power. Investiture can be divided into two categories: kinetic Investiture and static Investiture. Kinetic Investiture refers to Investiture actively doing something. When Investiture is kinetic, it can often be detected by various methods, such as Allomantic bronze or sand from the Dayside of Taldain. Static Investiture refers to all Investiture not actively doing something, such as a Feruchemical charge in a metalmind. At least some forms of static Investiture, including Lights not actively powering anything, can also be detected by Taldain\'s sand, though they affect the sand much more slowly than kinetic Investiture does. The term innate Investiture denotes a direct conduit between a person and the Spiritual Realm, such as the piece of Preservation in all Scadrians or Breath, and would likely be a subcategory of static Investiture. Cosmere scholars term the various methods of utilizing Investiture (such as the Metallic Arts, Surgebinding, and Awakening) Invested Arts. Since the Shattering, these can be grouped into three main categories. The most common are those powered directly by the Shards, which arise from the interactions between a Shard and the planet they are Invested in. Such Invested Arts are capable of far more spectacular results than other Invested Arts. If a planet does not have a Shard in residence, its inhabitants can still access and use Investiture by the ordinary laws of Realmatics, but, without a Shard to provide additional power, the results are far more limited. The last category is the few Invested Arts left over from before the Shattering of Adonalsium, of which the only known example is Yolish Lightweaving. Anti-Investiture \nMuch like there is both matter and antimatter, at least some forms of Investiture can be transformed into a substance known as anti-Investiture. Currently, the only known forms of anti-Investiture are anti-Stormlight and anti-Voidlight, which can be made by at least partially isolating Stormlight or Voidlight respectively from their Shard\'s pure tone and then exposing it to their Shard\'s opposite tone; Khriss seems to believe additional forms of anti-Investiture are possible. Anti-Voidlight, at least, looks mostly similar to regular Voidlight, but appears to warp the air around it. When anti-Investiture mixes with Investiture of the same type, the two annihilate in a violent explosion; if the Investiture in question is the soul of a person or that of an entity composed entirely of Investiture, like a spren, then this annihilation results in their permanent death. Perpendicularities \n\nWhen a sufficient amount of Investiture coalesces in one place in the Physical and Cognitive Realms, it creates a junction between all three Realms known as a perpendicularity. Most stable perpendicularities form from the presence of a Shard on a planet and the massive amount of Investiture they bring with them. Sentient beings can use perpendicularities to travel between the Physical and Cognitive Realms, which in turn facilitates easier travel on and off a planet for those with the knowledge to use them. Adonalsium \n\nWhen the cosmere began, there was an entity known as Adonalsium; this entity is widely believed to have created the cosmere. Perhaps for this reason, Adonalsium is sometimes referred to as "the power of creation." Investiture was Adonalsium\'s power, which has led cosmere scholars to conclude that either Investiture seeks intelligence because it used to be Adonalsium or that Adonalsium came into being because Investiture sought intelligence. The exact nature of Adonalsium, however, remains unclear. It may have been a mere force that acted according to specific rules or an actual entity that could think on its own; Khriss suspects the latter. The way Adonalsium saw the cosmere was simply the way its magic worked. For example, the spren on Roshar could not form fabrials prior to the Shattering because Adonalsium did not want them to be able to do so. Given Adonalsium had this level of control over the cosmere, some have suggested that Adonalsium may have wanted the Shattering to occur. Some say there are "subtle forces" being manifest in the cosmere, separate from Adonalsium, likely referring to belief in the God Beyond. Shards of Adonalsium \nShards of Adonalsium Shard Original Vessel Devotion Aona Dominion Skai Preservation Leras Ruin Ati Odium Rayse Cultivation Koravellium Avast Honor Tanavast Endowment Edgli Autonomy Bavadin Ambition Uli Da Invention Unknown Mercy Unknown Valor Unknown Whimsy Unknown Virtuosity Unknown\n\nDuring the Shattering, Adonalsium split into sixteen pieces, referred to as Shards of Adonalsium. Each of these Shards has an Intent that represents a particular facet of Adonalsium. Sixteen people involved in the Shattering then took up those Shards, becoming the first Vessels and effectively ascending to godhood. There was some sort of force or property of the cosmere that caused Adonalsium to shatter into the sixteen Shards that it did, and the distribution of the Shards to the Vessels was not random. The number sixteen has some significance to the mechanics of the cosmere, though, as Adonalsium could have split into some other number of Shards, it may have only become significant after the Shattering, and indeed may arise more from the beliefs of sapient creatures than a greater underlying property. Though the power of a Shard requires a mind to control it, known as a Vessel, the Intent of a Shard will slowly warp the minds of those that hold it, overriding their independence.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Properties and Forces', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '78a0ea2e-f49e-4f5d-b11e-b663076dc25c'}, page_content="Cosmere - For example, after Leras Ascended as Preservation, he became unable to cause harm, even to preserve other things. It is unclear whether the original Vessels knew this when they took up their Shards, but, eventually, the Vessels came to be known simply by their Shard's name. The Shards have access to infinite power, but the Vessels' minds, even though they are expanded by holding the Shard, are not capable of wielding it all at once. The Shards are also limited by certain rules that restrict how they can act; for example, they must fulfill a formally made oath. Failing to do so can give others an opening to act against the Shard who broke an oath; this has, on at least one occasion, resulted in the death of a Vessel. Shards can also intervene to block another Shard's actions, though not perfectly. Despite these restrictions, however, the Shards are generally capable of both subtle and incredible changes. Among other things, they can change the orbit of entire planets, make changes to individuals and entire species on a genetic level, and alter some of the mechanics of an Invested Art resulting from their presence on a planet. Since Shards exist primarily in the Spiritual Realm, they also have some ability to look into the future, though not all Shards are equally good at this and it fragments into more and more possibilities the further they look. Shards can also create avatars, beings with access to a portion of the Shard's power who can act autonomously from their Shard, but remain part of the Shard and ultimately cannot act against the Shard's instructions. Avatars stand in contrast to Splinters, who are pieces of a Shard's power that have or could develop free will. Avatars often seem to be used when a Shard wants to influence events on a planet other than the one they are primarily Invested in; for example, Autonomy, who is Invested in Taldain, has avatars on First of the Sun and Obrodai. Since the Shattering, the Shards have been the primary source of magic in the cosmere."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Properties and Forces', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '78a0ea2e-f49e-4f5d-b11e-b663076dc25c'}, page_content="Cosmere - The interactions between their Investiture and a planet give rise to Invested Arts that are far more powerful than those formed by people accessing background Investiture. Each Shard also has its own pure tone and rhythm, that can often influence and be heard emanating from their Investiture and can become part of the worlds they Invest in. For example, the Lights of Roshar pulse softly to their Shard's tone and rhythm and will follow a source—vocal or instrumental—generating their Shard's tone and both the Well of Ascension on Scadrial and the pulses a Seeker can pick up from someone using Allomancy are related to Preservation's tone and rhythm. Harmonizing the tones and rhythms of two different Shards is part of the creation of hybrid Investiture, like Warlight and Towerlight. Shards also have an opposite tone, which sounds identical to most people but is unpleasant to those attuned to that Shard's Investiture, and can only be created by Intent. This opposite tone can physically repel its Shard's Investiture and can help create anti-Investiture associated with its Shard."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Realms', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a898d946-cf16-44d6-a600-9ebc9ea4717f'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Realms \n\nIn the cosmere, everything exists in three Realms: the Physical Realm, the Cognitive Realm, and the Spiritual Realm. The three Realms have existed since the beginning of the cosmere. When someone in the cosmere dies, their body remains in the Physical Realm and a Cognitive Shadow forms in the Cognitive Realm. For most people, this Cognitive Shadow quickly moves on to the Beyond and their Investiture returns to the Spiritual Realm. The more Investiture someone held in life, the longer they can linger before being drawn to the Beyond, but only Slivers—those who once held a significant portion of a Shard's power—can resist the Beyond forever, though they can still choose to go if they so desire. Before the person passes to the Beyond, however, they can still be restored via Investiture healing or be infused with enough Investiture to become a more permanent Cognitive Shadow, usually as a result of a Shard's action. Those killed by Nightblood or anti-Investiture or consumed by Yelig-nar, however, cannot be resurrected in any way, as nothing remains of their soul. Time travel to the past, in any of the Realms, is impossible. The Physical Realm \nIn the Physical Realm, the cosmere is a star cluster of about 50 to 100 stars. The Physical Realm is composed of fundamental particles known as axi and follows ordinary laws of physics, except when the other Realms are involved. Currently, there are sixteen known planetary systems in the cosmere, which contain a total of nineteen notable planets. The cosmere is also home to other celestial objects, including several dwarf planets, gas giants, and constellations. At least one person has tried to leave the physical bounds of the cosmere, with unknown results. The Cognitive Realm \n\nThe Cognitive Realm is closely modeled on the Physical Realm, though there are significant differences. Because the Cognitive Realm is the Realm of thought, it is substantially impacted by how people imagine and perceive ideas. For example, outer space is significantly compressed in the Cognitive Realm, because people do not spend much time thinking about the space between planets. There are also some entities that naturally exist primarily in the Cognitive Realm, such as the spren who personify thoughts, emotions, and natural features, as well as certain Cognitive Shadows. The appearance of the Cognitive Realm around a particular planet seems to reflect salient characteristics of that planet—around Scadrial, for instance, it is composed of mist, while around Roshar it is composed of spheres. Land and water are inverted in the Cognitive Realm—what is solid land in the Physical Realm is unstable ground in the Cognitive, while bodies of water in the Physical are solid in the Cognitive. As a result, physical beings attempting to traverse non-solid regions of the Cognitive Realm risk drowning in whatever composes the local Cognitive Realm, though cognitive entities can traverse these regions safely. The Spiritual Realm \n\nThe Spiritual Realm exists beyond space and time. As such, it is not truly a place, but rather is the Realm of concepts like Intent, Identity, Connection, and Fortune. Everything exists in the Spiritual Realm in its ideal form. Intent is the Spiritual property that expresses a person's considered will or purpose. Intent cannot be formed accidentally; if Intent is required to do something, then the person attempting to do it must not only do it, but mean to do it. Many Invested Arts require their user to act with Intent in order to properly use their magic. Invested entities, like spren, Cognitive Shadows, and even Shards have a fundamental Intent that describes the purpose of the Investiture that constitutes their essence. Indeed, the longer they exist, the more they will become bound by their Intent, unable to act against it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Realms', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a898d946-cf16-44d6-a600-9ebc9ea4717f'}, page_content='Cosmere - An extreme example of this is Ati, the original Vessel of the Shard Ruin, who was initially a "kind and generous" man, but became so consumed by his Shard\'s Intent that he sought the complete destruction of Scadrial and even viewed it as necessary. Along with Intent, there is also the associated concept of Command.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Realms', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a898d946-cf16-44d6-a600-9ebc9ea4717f'}, page_content='Cosmere - Commands are more limited than Intent, but they help to focus the Intent so that Investiture can respond appropriately. While most Commands are related to a certain Invested Art or some other specific method of manipulating Investiture, there are also the Dawnshards, four fundamental Commands that were involved in both the creation of the cosmere and the Shattering of Adonalsium. Identity is the Spiritual property that demarcates one person or object from another and describes who or what they are.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Realms', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a898d946-cf16-44d6-a600-9ebc9ea4717f'}, page_content="Cosmere - Losing their Identity during the False Desolation turned the singers into slaveform. Identity also serves as the lock and key for metalminds; Feruchemists can only withdraw attributes stored by someone with a matching Identity—ordinarily, this means only attributes they stored. Because Identity describes who a person is, it is closely tied to the concept of a spiritweb, which is sometimes called Spiritual DNA. spiritwebs are not entirely understood, but they are quantifiable in some way, and seem to record information about a person's Investiture, such as the genetics that make one an Allomancer. Magical healing in the cosmere usually works by using Investiture to make a person's condition in the Physical Realm more closely match their idealized self in the Spiritual Realm, though this idealized self is filtered through the person's perception of themself in the Cognitive Realm. As a result, healing is usually limited by how a person views themself, and once a person accepts something as part of themself, it will not be able to heal. In addition to containing this information about a person or object's Identity, the Spiritual Realm also stores Connection between people, objects, and even more abstract concepts. For example, a person can form Connection to a region, which will allow them to speak that region's language. In order to take up a Shard after a Vessel dies, a person must be Connected to that Shard. Because the Spiritual Realm exists beyond space and time, it—along with the associated property of Fortune—can be used to see events in other locations or even the future, though this is generally very difficult."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Physical Realm', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e3644ffe-56b5-4295-8928-9c867f7fe976'}, page_content='Cosmere -  The Physical Realm \nIn the Physical Realm, the cosmere is a star cluster of about 50 to 100 stars. The Physical Realm is composed of fundamental particles known as axi and follows ordinary laws of physics, except when the other Realms are involved. Currently, there are sixteen known planetary systems in the cosmere, which contain a total of nineteen notable planets.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Physical Realm', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e3644ffe-56b5-4295-8928-9c867f7fe976'}, page_content='Cosmere - The cosmere is also home to other celestial objects, including several dwarf planets, gas giants, and constellations. At least one person has tried to leave the physical bounds of the cosmere, with unknown results.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Cognitive Realm', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3098ad31-1e81-4713-bbe1-d1e4c570509c'}, page_content='Cosmere -  The Cognitive Realm \n\nThe Cognitive Realm is closely modeled on the Physical Realm, though there are significant differences. Because the Cognitive Realm is the Realm of thought, it is substantially impacted by how people imagine and perceive ideas. For example, outer space is significantly compressed in the Cognitive Realm, because people do not spend much time thinking about the space between planets. There are also some entities that naturally exist primarily in the Cognitive Realm, such as the spren who personify thoughts, emotions, and natural features, as well as certain Cognitive Shadows. The appearance of the Cognitive Realm around a particular planet seems to reflect salient characteristics of that planet—around Scadrial, for instance, it is composed of mist, while around Roshar it is composed of spheres.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Cognitive Realm', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3098ad31-1e81-4713-bbe1-d1e4c570509c'}, page_content='Cosmere - Land and water are inverted in the Cognitive Realm—what is solid land in the Physical Realm is unstable ground in the Cognitive, while bodies of water in the Physical are solid in the Cognitive. As a result, physical beings attempting to traverse non-solid regions of the Cognitive Realm risk drowning in whatever composes the local Cognitive Realm, though cognitive entities can traverse these regions safely.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Spiritual Realm', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c23a6e8e-307b-49f6-8f89-2bdbc77c83e8'}, page_content="Cosmere -  The Spiritual Realm \n\nThe Spiritual Realm exists beyond space and time. As such, it is not truly a place, but rather is the Realm of concepts like Intent, Identity, Connection, and Fortune. Everything exists in the Spiritual Realm in its ideal form. Intent is the Spiritual property that expresses a person's considered will or purpose. Intent cannot be formed accidentally; if Intent is required to do something, then the person attempting to do it must not only do it, but mean to do it. Many Invested Arts require their user to act with Intent in order to properly use their magic. Invested entities, like spren, Cognitive Shadows, and even Shards have a fundamental Intent that describes the purpose of the Investiture that constitutes their essence. Indeed, the longer they exist, the more they will become bound by their Intent, unable to act against it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Spiritual Realm', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c23a6e8e-307b-49f6-8f89-2bdbc77c83e8'}, page_content='Cosmere - An extreme example of this is Ati, the original Vessel of the Shard Ruin, who was initially a "kind and generous" man, but became so consumed by his Shard\'s Intent that he sought the complete destruction of Scadrial and even viewed it as necessary. Along with Intent, there is also the associated concept of Command.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Spiritual Realm', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c23a6e8e-307b-49f6-8f89-2bdbc77c83e8'}, page_content="Cosmere - Commands are more limited than Intent, but they help to focus the Intent so that Investiture can respond appropriately. While most Commands are related to a certain Invested Art or some other specific method of manipulating Investiture, there are also the Dawnshards, four fundamental Commands that were involved in both the creation of the cosmere and the Shattering of Adonalsium. Identity is the Spiritual property that demarcates one person or object from another and describes who or what they are. Losing their Identity during the False Desolation turned the singers into slaveform. Identity also serves as the lock and key for metalminds; Feruchemists can only withdraw attributes stored by someone with a matching Identity—ordinarily, this means only attributes they stored. Because Identity describes who a person is, it is closely tied to the concept of a spiritweb, which is sometimes called Spiritual DNA. spiritwebs are not entirely understood, but they are quantifiable in some way, and seem to record information about a person's Investiture, such as the genetics that make one an Allomancer. Magical healing in the cosmere usually works by using Investiture to make a person's condition in the Physical Realm more closely match their idealized self in the Spiritual Realm, though this idealized self is filtered through the person's perception of themself in the Cognitive Realm. As a result, healing is usually limited by how a person views themself, and once a person accepts something as part of themself, it will not be able to heal. In addition to containing this information about a person or object's Identity, the Spiritual Realm also stores Connection between people, objects, and even more abstract concepts. For example, a person can form Connection to a region, which will allow them to speak that region's language. In order to take up a Shard after a Vessel dies, a person must be Connected to that Shard. Because the Spiritual Realm exists beyond space and time, it—along with the associated property of Fortune—can be used to see events in other locations or even the future, though this is generally very difficult."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Investiture', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e682ca52-dc34-406c-af08-4190aeb483bd'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Investiture \n\nJust as there is an equivalency between mass and energy, in the cosmere these things can also be exchanged with a magical power known as Investiture. When Investiture is accounted for, the cosmere adheres to the ordinary laws of conservation and thermodynamics. Investiture mostly exists in the Spiritual Realm, though it is more precisely understood as transcending the Realms.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Investiture', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e682ca52-dc34-406c-af08-4190aeb483bd'}, page_content='Cosmere - However, it can also exist in a "condensed" form in the Physical Realm as solid, liquid, or gas. If left alone, Investiture will, over time, become self-aware, resulting in a Splinter. Khriss suspects that the land itself on Sel is undergoing a process like this as a result of Devotion and Dominion\'s Investiture being trapped in the Cognitive Realm. More common examples of this process include seons and spren. Investiture has a property that associates it with one of the sixteen Shards of Adonalsium; at the Shattering of Adonalsium, all Investiture was divided evenly between the Shards. Even though, as a result of the Shattering, all Investiture is associated with a Shard, Investiture also remains linked to Adonalsium in some way and the Shattering meant "everything and nothing at the same time" to Investiture. When one form of Investiture attempts to co-opt or corrupt another form of Investiture, it will often produce a red effect. Examples of this include the red smoke given off by Shai\'s soulstamps when she uses them to temporarily tweak Gaotona\'s soul, the red haze of Trell invading Scadrial, and the red coloring of some of the spren Enlightened by Sja-anat. Similarly, when some entity possesses or has a strong influence over a person, the person\'s eyes will often glow red, as seen with the bodies on Scadrial controlled by Autonomy, the soldiers possessed via the Thrill at the Battle of Thaylen Field, and many of Odium\'s servants, whose souls are corrupted by his power. Investiture can be divided into two categories: kinetic Investiture and static Investiture.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Investiture', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e682ca52-dc34-406c-af08-4190aeb483bd'}, page_content="Cosmere - Kinetic Investiture refers to Investiture actively doing something. When Investiture is kinetic, it can often be detected by various methods, such as Allomantic bronze or sand from the Dayside of Taldain. Static Investiture refers to all Investiture not actively doing something, such as a Feruchemical charge in a metalmind. At least some forms of static Investiture, including Lights not actively powering anything, can also be detected by Taldain's sand, though they affect the sand much more slowly than kinetic Investiture does. The term innate Investiture denotes a direct conduit between a person and the Spiritual Realm, such as the piece of Preservation in all Scadrians or Breath, and would likely be a subcategory of static Investiture. Cosmere scholars term the various methods of utilizing Investiture (such as the Metallic Arts, Surgebinding, and Awakening) Invested Arts. Since the Shattering, these can be grouped into three main categories. The most common are those powered directly by the Shards, which arise from the interactions between a Shard and the planet they are Invested in. Such Invested Arts are capable of far more spectacular results than other Invested Arts. If a planet does not have a Shard in residence, its inhabitants can still access and use Investiture by the ordinary laws of Realmatics, but, without a Shard to provide additional power, the results are far more limited. The last category is the few Invested Arts left over from before the Shattering of Adonalsium, of which the only known example is Yolish Lightweaving. Anti-Investiture \nMuch like there is both matter and antimatter, at least some forms of Investiture can be transformed into a substance known as anti-Investiture. Currently, the only known forms of anti-Investiture are anti-Stormlight and anti-Voidlight, which can be made by at least partially isolating Stormlight or Voidlight respectively from their Shard's pure tone and then exposing it to their Shard's opposite tone; Khriss seems to believe additional forms of anti-Investiture are possible. Anti-Voidlight, at least, looks mostly similar to regular Voidlight, but appears to warp the air around it. When anti-Investiture mixes with Investiture of the same type, the two annihilate in a violent explosion; if the Investiture in question is the soul of a person or that of an entity composed entirely of Investiture, like a spren, then this annihilation results in their permanent death."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Anti-Investiture', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '74ecf855-0bf0-47c7-bb53-96f39c5f3705'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Anti-Investiture \nMuch like there is both matter and antimatter, at least some forms of Investiture can be transformed into a substance known as anti-Investiture. Currently, the only known forms of anti-Investiture are anti-Stormlight and anti-Voidlight, which can be made by at least partially isolating Stormlight or Voidlight respectively from their Shard's pure tone and then exposing it to their Shard's opposite tone; Khriss seems to believe additional forms of anti-Investiture are possible."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Anti-Investiture', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '74ecf855-0bf0-47c7-bb53-96f39c5f3705'}, page_content='Cosmere - Anti-Voidlight, at least, looks mostly similar to regular Voidlight, but appears to warp the air around it. When anti-Investiture mixes with Investiture of the same type, the two annihilate in a violent explosion; if the Investiture in question is the soul of a person or that of an entity composed entirely of Investiture, like a spren, then this annihilation results in their permanent death.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Perpendicularities', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be2501f4-ff25-4254-883a-9449d31dcd11'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Perpendicularities \n\nWhen a sufficient amount of Investiture coalesces in one place in the Physical and Cognitive Realms, it creates a junction between all three Realms known as a perpendicularity. Most stable perpendicularities form from the presence of a Shard on a planet and the massive amount of Investiture they bring with them.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Perpendicularities', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be2501f4-ff25-4254-883a-9449d31dcd11'}, page_content='Cosmere - Sentient beings can use perpendicularities to travel between the Physical and Cognitive Realms, which in turn facilitates easier travel on and off a planet for those with the knowledge to use them.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Adonalsium', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '87b83d54-2ce6-491e-b56d-ef45aebc268e'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Adonalsium \n\nWhen the cosmere began, there was an entity known as Adonalsium; this entity is widely believed to have created the cosmere. Perhaps for this reason, Adonalsium is sometimes referred to as "the power of creation." Investiture was Adonalsium\'s power, which has led cosmere scholars to conclude that either Investiture seeks intelligence because it used to be Adonalsium or that Adonalsium came into being because Investiture sought intelligence. The exact nature of Adonalsium, however, remains unclear. It may have been a mere force that acted according to specific rules or an actual entity that could think on its own; Khriss suspects the latter. The way Adonalsium saw the cosmere was simply the way its magic worked. For example, the spren on Roshar could not form fabrials prior to the Shattering because Adonalsium did not want them to be able to do so. Given Adonalsium had this level of control over the cosmere, some have suggested that Adonalsium may have wanted the Shattering to occur. Some say there are "subtle forces" being manifest in the cosmere, separate from Adonalsium, likely referring to belief in the God Beyond. Shards of Adonalsium \nShards of Adonalsium Shard Original Vessel Devotion Aona Dominion Skai Preservation Leras Ruin Ati Odium Rayse Cultivation Koravellium Avast Honor Tanavast Endowment Edgli Autonomy Bavadin Ambition Uli Da Invention Unknown Mercy Unknown Valor Unknown Whimsy Unknown Virtuosity Unknown\n\nDuring the Shattering, Adonalsium split into sixteen pieces, referred to as Shards of Adonalsium. Each of these Shards has an Intent that represents a particular facet of Adonalsium. Sixteen people involved in the Shattering then took up those Shards, becoming the first Vessels and effectively ascending to godhood. There was some sort of force or property of the cosmere that caused Adonalsium to shatter into the sixteen Shards that it did, and the distribution of the Shards to the Vessels was not random. The number sixteen has some significance to the mechanics of the cosmere, though, as Adonalsium could have split into some other number of Shards, it may have only become significant after the Shattering, and indeed may arise more from the beliefs of sapient creatures than a greater underlying property. Though the power of a Shard requires a mind to control it, known as a Vessel, the Intent of a Shard will slowly warp the minds of those that hold it, overriding their independence.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Adonalsium', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '87b83d54-2ce6-491e-b56d-ef45aebc268e'}, page_content="Cosmere - For example, after Leras Ascended as Preservation, he became unable to cause harm, even to preserve other things. It is unclear whether the original Vessels knew this when they took up their Shards, but, eventually, the Vessels came to be known simply by their Shard's name. The Shards have access to infinite power, but the Vessels' minds, even though they are expanded by holding the Shard, are not capable of wielding it all at once. The Shards are also limited by certain rules that restrict how they can act; for example, they must fulfill a formally made oath. Failing to do so can give others an opening to act against the Shard who broke an oath; this has, on at least one occasion, resulted in the death of a Vessel. Shards can also intervene to block another Shard's actions, though not perfectly. Despite these restrictions, however, the Shards are generally capable of both subtle and incredible changes. Among other things, they can change the orbit of entire planets, make changes to individuals and entire species on a genetic level, and alter some of the mechanics of an Invested Art resulting from their presence on a planet. Since Shards exist primarily in the Spiritual Realm, they also have some ability to look into the future, though not all Shards are equally good at this and it fragments into more and more possibilities the further they look. Shards can also create avatars, beings with access to a portion of the Shard's power who can act autonomously from their Shard, but remain part of the Shard and ultimately cannot act against the Shard's instructions. Avatars stand in contrast to Splinters, who are pieces of a Shard's power that have or could develop free will. Avatars often seem to be used when a Shard wants to influence events on a planet other than the one they are primarily Invested in; for example, Autonomy, who is Invested in Taldain, has avatars on First of the Sun and Obrodai. Since the Shattering, the Shards have been the primary source of magic in the cosmere."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Adonalsium', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '87b83d54-2ce6-491e-b56d-ef45aebc268e'}, page_content="Cosmere - The interactions between their Investiture and a planet give rise to Invested Arts that are far more powerful than those formed by people accessing background Investiture. Each Shard also has its own pure tone and rhythm, that can often influence and be heard emanating from their Investiture and can become part of the worlds they Invest in. For example, the Lights of Roshar pulse softly to their Shard's tone and rhythm and will follow a source—vocal or instrumental—generating their Shard's tone and both the Well of Ascension on Scadrial and the pulses a Seeker can pick up from someone using Allomancy are related to Preservation's tone and rhythm. Harmonizing the tones and rhythms of two different Shards is part of the creation of hybrid Investiture, like Warlight and Towerlight. Shards also have an opposite tone, which sounds identical to most people but is unpleasant to those attuned to that Shard's Investiture, and can only be created by Intent. This opposite tone can physically repel its Shard's Investiture and can help create anti-Investiture associated with its Shard."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Shards of Adonalsium', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '10ab11ff-1c61-4531-860d-39c7d1665d37'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Shards of Adonalsium \nShards of Adonalsium Shard Original Vessel Devotion Aona Dominion Skai Preservation Leras Ruin Ati Odium Rayse Cultivation Koravellium Avast Honor Tanavast Endowment Edgli Autonomy Bavadin Ambition Uli Da Invention Unknown Mercy Unknown Valor Unknown Whimsy Unknown Virtuosity Unknown\n\nDuring the Shattering, Adonalsium split into sixteen pieces, referred to as Shards of Adonalsium. Each of these Shards has an Intent that represents a particular facet of Adonalsium. Sixteen people involved in the Shattering then took up those Shards, becoming the first Vessels and effectively ascending to godhood. There was some sort of force or property of the cosmere that caused Adonalsium to shatter into the sixteen Shards that it did, and the distribution of the Shards to the Vessels was not random. The number sixteen has some significance to the mechanics of the cosmere, though, as Adonalsium could have split into some other number of Shards, it may have only become significant after the Shattering, and indeed may arise more from the beliefs of sapient creatures than a greater underlying property. Though the power of a Shard requires a mind to control it, known as a Vessel, the Intent of a Shard will slowly warp the minds of those that hold it, overriding their independence.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Shards of Adonalsium', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '10ab11ff-1c61-4531-860d-39c7d1665d37'}, page_content="Cosmere - For example, after Leras Ascended as Preservation, he became unable to cause harm, even to preserve other things. It is unclear whether the original Vessels knew this when they took up their Shards, but, eventually, the Vessels came to be known simply by their Shard's name. The Shards have access to infinite power, but the Vessels' minds, even though they are expanded by holding the Shard, are not capable of wielding it all at once. The Shards are also limited by certain rules that restrict how they can act; for example, they must fulfill a formally made oath. Failing to do so can give others an opening to act against the Shard who broke an oath; this has, on at least one occasion, resulted in the death of a Vessel. Shards can also intervene to block another Shard's actions, though not perfectly. Despite these restrictions, however, the Shards are generally capable of both subtle and incredible changes. Among other things, they can change the orbit of entire planets, make changes to individuals and entire species on a genetic level, and alter some of the mechanics of an Invested Art resulting from their presence on a planet. Since Shards exist primarily in the Spiritual Realm, they also have some ability to look into the future, though not all Shards are equally good at this and it fragments into more and more possibilities the further they look. Shards can also create avatars, beings with access to a portion of the Shard's power who can act autonomously from their Shard, but remain part of the Shard and ultimately cannot act against the Shard's instructions. Avatars stand in contrast to Splinters, who are pieces of a Shard's power that have or could develop free will. Avatars often seem to be used when a Shard wants to influence events on a planet other than the one they are primarily Invested in; for example, Autonomy, who is Invested in Taldain, has avatars on First of the Sun and Obrodai. Since the Shattering, the Shards have been the primary source of magic in the cosmere."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Shards of Adonalsium', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '10ab11ff-1c61-4531-860d-39c7d1665d37'}, page_content="Cosmere - The interactions between their Investiture and a planet give rise to Invested Arts that are far more powerful than those formed by people accessing background Investiture. Each Shard also has its own pure tone and rhythm, that can often influence and be heard emanating from their Investiture and can become part of the worlds they Invest in. For example, the Lights of Roshar pulse softly to their Shard's tone and rhythm and will follow a source—vocal or instrumental—generating their Shard's tone and both the Well of Ascension on Scadrial and the pulses a Seeker can pick up from someone using Allomancy are related to Preservation's tone and rhythm. Harmonizing the tones and rhythms of two different Shards is part of the creation of hybrid Investiture, like Warlight and Towerlight. Shards also have an opposite tone, which sounds identical to most people but is unpleasant to those attuned to that Shard's Investiture, and can only be created by Intent. This opposite tone can physically repel its Shard's Investiture and can help create anti-Investiture associated with its Shard."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Planets', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c946a1ec-e5e0-4113-8846-fe30fecf09a7'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Planets \n\nWhile the cosmere has a wide array of planets, many of them are uninhabited, not significantly Invested, or otherwise not generally relevant to the broader cosmere. Planets in the cosmere have something akin to souls, likely referring to their presence in the Cognitive and/or Spiritual Realms. Significant Worlds of the CosmerePlanetary SystemPlanetShardsBooksReferenceUnknown Bjendal Unknown None (Referenced in The Lost Metal) Unknown Canticle None The Sunlit Man Unknown Dhatri Unknown None (Referenced in The Lost Metal) Drominad System First of the Sun Patji (Avatar of Autonomy) Sixth of the Dusk Unknown Lumar Unknown Tress of the Emerald Sea Unknown Mythos Unknown None (Referenced in The Lost Metal) Nalthian System Nalthis Endowment Warbreaker, Nightblood (unpublished) Unknown Obrodai Avatar of Autonomy, possibly others None (Referenced in Oathbringer) Rosharan System Ashyn None The Silence Divine (unpublished)  Braize Odium The Stormlight Archive  Roshar Cultivation, Honor The Stormlight Archive Scadrian System Scadrial Preservation, Ruin (combined as Harmony) Mistborn series Selish System Sel Devotion, Dominion Elantris trilogy, The Emperor's Soul Taldain System Taldain Autonomy White Sand Threnodite System Threnody Ambition Shadows for Silence in the Forests of Hell UTol system Komashi Virtuosity Yumi and the Nightmare Painter  UTolUnknown Vax Unknown None (Referenced in Elantris and Mistborn: Secret History) Unknown Yolen None Dragonsteel series (unpublished) \n\n Trishardic Systems \nThe Rosharan system consists of three planets of note. Ashyn was nearly destroyed in an apocalypse long ago, though a few cities remain floating in the atmosphere. Certain bacteria on the planet are able to grant magical powers, including the ability to keep the floating cities aloft. Roshar is a planet with a powerful storm that frequently blows across the continent and where spren can cross into the Physical Realm. Braize is the prison of the Fused where the Heralds are tortured between Desolations. The system is home to the Shards Cultivation and Honor, though the latter has been Splintered; additionally, Odium is currently trapped in the system. Dishardic Systems \nScadrial is the most technologically advanced planet and the most similar to Yolen. Its three magic systems all use metal to store and access Investiture. The system is home to the Shards Preservation and Ruin, who have since combined into Harmony. Sel, also known as Seol, is a large planet with three great domains. It has many magic systems, which are tied to the user's location and are accessed by creating shapes in the proper form, rather like programming."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Planets', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c946a1ec-e5e0-4113-8846-fe30fecf09a7'}, page_content='Cosmere - The system is home to the Shards Devotion and Dominion, who have both been Splintered by Odium. Monoshardic Systems \nThe planet Taldain is tidally locked between two stars, a blue-white supergiant and a white dwarf. The side of the planet facing the former, Dayside, is a vast desert where Investiture arrives from the light of the star. Darkside faces the white dwarf, leaving it in perpetual twilight; many things there fluoresce in ultraviolet light. Its Shard, Autonomy, keeps the planet isolated from the rest of the cosmere. The Drominad system is home to several planets, all of which have water as a dominant feature. Three of them are inhabited by humans, the most of any planetary system in the cosmere at the time Khriss wrote her essay on the system. The innermost planet, First of the Sun has a perpendicularity, though the region around it in the Physical Realm is incredibly dangerous, and is home to Patji, an avatar of Autonomy. Nalthis is a world of color. Color is needed to fuel its magic system, Awakening, and those with large amounts of Breath will enhance the colors around them and can see perfect shades of colors. When someone dies, Endowment, the resident Shard, occasionally sends their Cognitive Shadow back as a Returned to prevent a tragedy they foresee after their death. Threnody is a planet with two principal parts: the Fallen World, which is under the control of an unknown entity called the Evil that is so dangerous that everyone was forced to leave, and the Forests of Hell, which is home to dangerous Cognitive Shadows known as Shades. The system used to be home to the Shard Ambition, whose Splintering has severely warped planet.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Planets', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c946a1ec-e5e0-4113-8846-fe30fecf09a7'}, page_content="Cosmere - The UTol system is located near where the Shard Virtuosity Splintered herself and home to two habitable planets. The eponymous planet of UTol is a water-dominated planet inhabited by Sho Del that seems to be well-known in the cosmere by the space age. Its sister planet Komashi is home to humans and Splinters of Virtuosity known as hijo; before the destruction of the father machine, it was notable for an eternal shroud of black Investiture covering the planet. Non-shardic Systems \nCanticle is an extremely small planet with a dense, Invested core. The light of the system's host star is also Invested; when that light reaches the surface of Canticle, it is quickly pulled down to the planet's core, superheating everything in its path. As a result, people living on the planet must keep moving constantly in order to stay ahead of the sunrise. Yolen is the original planet of humans and the location of the Shattering. It has few inhabitants in the modern era and has been hidden from most of the people of the cosmere. Other Notable Worlds \nDhatri is the homeworld of the aethers, though they have since spread around the cosmere; the world has been made inhospitable due to an entity known as the dark aether. Lumar is a backwater planet that is home to the aether spores, a compressed form of aether that grows dangerously fast when touched by water, which are produced by a variant strain of the aethers on the twelve moons that hang close to the surface of the planet. Little is known about Bjendal, Mythos, Obrodai, and Vax. Additionally, there is the homeworld of the Sleepless, which may be one of those four planets."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trishardic Systems', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'acfca6b6-f89e-47eb-a871-62ed78cfe2a8'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Trishardic Systems \nThe Rosharan system consists of three planets of note. Ashyn was nearly destroyed in an apocalypse long ago, though a few cities remain floating in the atmosphere. Certain bacteria on the planet are able to grant magical powers, including the ability to keep the floating cities aloft. Roshar is a planet with a powerful storm that frequently blows across the continent and where spren can cross into the Physical Realm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trishardic Systems', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'acfca6b6-f89e-47eb-a871-62ed78cfe2a8'}, page_content='Cosmere - Braize is the prison of the Fused where the Heralds are tortured between Desolations. The system is home to the Shards Cultivation and Honor, though the latter has been Splintered; additionally, Odium is currently trapped in the system.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Dishardic Systems', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6f52bd4a-d5bd-49ae-9ac1-8cd0d124ad7d'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Dishardic Systems \nScadrial is the most technologically advanced planet and the most similar to Yolen. Its three magic systems all use metal to store and access Investiture. The system is home to the Shards Preservation and Ruin, who have since combined into Harmony. Sel, also known as Seol, is a large planet with three great domains. It has many magic systems, which are tied to the user's location and are accessed by creating shapes in the proper form, rather like programming."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Dishardic Systems', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6f52bd4a-d5bd-49ae-9ac1-8cd0d124ad7d'}, page_content='Cosmere - The system is home to the Shards Devotion and Dominion, who have both been Splintered by Odium.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Monoshardic Systems', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '696a7dee-f709-4675-9025-edd1e546ed83'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Monoshardic Systems \nThe planet Taldain is tidally locked between two stars, a blue-white supergiant and a white dwarf. The side of the planet facing the former, Dayside, is a vast desert where Investiture arrives from the light of the star. Darkside faces the white dwarf, leaving it in perpetual twilight; many things there fluoresce in ultraviolet light. Its Shard, Autonomy, keeps the planet isolated from the rest of the cosmere. The Drominad system is home to several planets, all of which have water as a dominant feature. Three of them are inhabited by humans, the most of any planetary system in the cosmere at the time Khriss wrote her essay on the system. The innermost planet, First of the Sun has a perpendicularity, though the region around it in the Physical Realm is incredibly dangerous, and is home to Patji, an avatar of Autonomy. Nalthis is a world of color. Color is needed to fuel its magic system, Awakening, and those with large amounts of Breath will enhance the colors around them and can see perfect shades of colors. When someone dies, Endowment, the resident Shard, occasionally sends their Cognitive Shadow back as a Returned to prevent a tragedy they foresee after their death. Threnody is a planet with two principal parts: the Fallen World, which is under the control of an unknown entity called the Evil that is so dangerous that everyone was forced to leave, and the Forests of Hell, which is home to dangerous Cognitive Shadows known as Shades. The system used to be home to the Shard Ambition, whose Splintering has severely warped planet.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Monoshardic Systems', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '696a7dee-f709-4675-9025-edd1e546ed83'}, page_content='Cosmere - The UTol system is located near where the Shard Virtuosity Splintered herself and home to two habitable planets. The eponymous planet of UTol is a water-dominated planet inhabited by Sho Del that seems to be well-known in the cosmere by the space age. Its sister planet Komashi is home to humans and Splinters of Virtuosity known as hijo; before the destruction of the father machine, it was notable for an eternal shroud of black Investiture covering the planet.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Non-shardic Systems', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5647b507-1b09-46b3-8ca4-98dcaeef8a03'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Non-shardic Systems \nCanticle is an extremely small planet with a dense, Invested core. The light of the system's host star is also Invested; when that light reaches the surface of Canticle, it is quickly pulled down to the planet's core, superheating everything in its path."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Non-shardic Systems', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5647b507-1b09-46b3-8ca4-98dcaeef8a03'}, page_content='Cosmere - As a result, people living on the planet must keep moving constantly in order to stay ahead of the sunrise. Yolen is the original planet of humans and the location of the Shattering. It has few inhabitants in the modern era and has been hidden from most of the people of the cosmere.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Other Notable Worlds', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '32a90264-fa28-4e98-8d1c-3e1db7e92801'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Other Notable Worlds \nDhatri is the homeworld of the aethers, though they have since spread around the cosmere; the world has been made inhospitable due to an entity known as the dark aether. Lumar is a backwater planet that is home to the aether spores, a compressed form of aether that grows dangerously fast when touched by water, which are produced by a variant strain of the aethers on the twelve moons that hang close to the surface of the planet.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Other Notable Worlds', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '32a90264-fa28-4e98-8d1c-3e1db7e92801'}, page_content='Cosmere - Little is known about Bjendal, Mythos, Obrodai, and Vax. Additionally, there is the homeworld of the Sleepless, which may be one of those four planets.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28f599f5-dfa2-436e-9f47-0dd7d8ffe876'}, page_content='Cosmere -  History \n Before the Shattering \n\nAt some point, the Dawnshards were used to create the cosmere. The first humans lived on Yolen and were created by Adonalsium. At some point, a poorly-understood and parasitic ecosystem hostile to humans, known as fainlife, began to develop on Yolen. It began to spread and overtake the landscape, though the other inhabitants eventually learned how to keep it in check. Yolen was also home to the Sho Del, the fainlife equivalent of humans, and dragons. Information about fainlife remains accessible enough in the modern cosmere that Khriss was able to mention it to cosmere-aware people without need for explanation. Prior to the Shattering, Yolen\'s technology was Bronze Age. During this time, Adonalsium created several planets, including the entire Rosharan system. Most of the planets in the cosmere existed and were named prior to the Shattering, though worldhopping was much less common at the time. Investiture still existed prior to the Shattering, though its form was different. During this time, there was a plot to destroy Adonalsium, but it failed. Hoid, the dragon Frost, and the original Vessels all lived before the Shattering. The Shattering of Adonalsium \n\nEventually, around ten-thousand years before the True Desolation, a group of people that opposed Adonalsium came together and plotted its destruction. This group included people of all three sapient species on Yolen: humans, dragons, and Sho Del. To achieve their goal, they created a weapon that utilized the Dawnshards. In an event known as the Shattering of Adonalsium, the weapon was used to "undo" Adonalsium, splitting it into the sixteen Shards; the weapon was expended in the process, though remnants of it exist in the Physical Realm and are responsible for Hoid\'s immortality. As part of the Shattering, sixteen of the people who had opposed Adonalsium took up the new Shards and became the first Vessels. There was some sort of force that caused Adonalsium to shatter into the Shards that it did, and the distribution of the Shards to the Vessels was not random. The Shattering occurred on Yolen, though there is some "weirdness" with regard to Yolen and location, and occurred all at once. As a result of the Shattering, all Investiture in the cosmere became aligned with one of the sixteen Shards. Hoid was loosely involved in the plot to Shatter Adonalsium and was present at the Shattering. He also had the opportunity to take a Shard, but turned it down.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28f599f5-dfa2-436e-9f47-0dd7d8ffe876'}, page_content='Cosmere - He and Frost both knew the original Vessels personally. After the Shattering, the new Vessels made some sort of agreement to not interfere with each other, though the exact agreement was somewhat ambiguous and the Vessels who suggested it did not make sure to get a formal oath from the others.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28f599f5-dfa2-436e-9f47-0dd7d8ffe876'}, page_content='Cosmere - Regardless, the Shards then went their separate ways. Most settled on a planet, though Virtuosity instead chose to instead travel around the cosmere before eventually Splintering herself near the UTol system. Some chose to go off on their own, while others stayed together with other Shards. Around this time, Ruin and Preservation created the planet Scadrial, using the non-fain parts of Yolen as a guide. Odium\'s Quest \n\nSoon after the Shattering, or possibly even beforehand, the Vessel of Odium, Rayse, decided he wanted to become the strongest being in the cosmere. However, Odium is, by its nature, selfish and Rayse did not want the Intent of an additional Shard to make him into something else, so he instead decided to destroy the other Shards so that there would be no one left to challenge him. To do so, he developed a way to Splinter a Shard\'s power, which also results in the death of its Vessel. Odium\'s first target was Ambition, as he feared that it would be a threat to him. However, while searching for Ambition, over 7700 years before the True Desolation, he encountered the Shards Devotion and Dominion on Sel and attacked them, likely because he could argue they had violated the Vessel\'s pact to not interfere with each other. In the ensuing battle, Odium successfully splintered Devotion and Dominion and killed their Vessels, Aona and Skai. In order to ensure that no one could take up their Shards, he then somehow moved most of their Investiture from the Spiritual Realm into the Cognitive Realm, which made the Selish Cognitive Realm incredibly dangerous and the Selish Invested Arts location-dependent. Sometime after he Splintered Devotion and Dominion, Odium finally found Ambition, who had settled in the Threnodite system. Odium attacked and mortally wounded Ambition, though the Shard fled and was ultimately Splintered elsewhere, in a battle with Odium and Mercy. These clashes resulted in a wound in the Spiritual Realm and left ripped-off chunks of Ambition\'s power in the Threnodite system, which twisted the people and planet of Threnody. A long time after the Shattering, Odium got permission from Honor and Cultivation to join them in the Rosharan system. Odium never intended to Invest himself in a planet, but, at some point, he became Invested in the Rosharan system to the point where he would now have to leave some of his power behind or forcibly tear it out in order to leave. Early in his time in the Rosharan system, Odium took an interest in the humans living on Ashyn and encouraged them to experiment with Surgebinding. Those experiments, combined with at least one Dawnshard, set the entire planet on fire, leaving it largely uninhabitable outside of a few small pockets, causing most of the population to flee to Roshar. At some point while he was in the Rosharan system, Honor and Cultivation used their power to trap him there. As a result, Odium has since been waging a war to free himself from whatever binds him to the system so that he can continue his quest. To that end, he Splintered off pieces of his power to create the Fused, the Unmade, and voidspren, and also Invested in the Rosharan system enough to create and grant access to Invested Art known as Voidbinding. When the Fused first appeared, Honor created the Heralds, who could seal the Fused on Braize, though the Fused tortured the Heralds into allowing them to return to Roshar. Every time a Herald broke, a Desolation would begin and the Heralds and Knights Radiant would fight the Fused until they could be sealed on Braize again. This situation continued for millennia and the Shards remained at a stalemate, especially after nine of the Heralds abandoned the Oathpact, leaving it to Talenel alone, who was better able to withstand the torture on Braize. Odium\'s repeated clashes with other Shards have left him with "scars that do not heal," forcing him to become more careful about the battles he engages in. Many of the other Shards are aware of Odium\'s actions, though most do not seem to consider him a problem, as long as he remains bound to the Rosharan system. Endowment is currently indifferent to him and thinks he was justified in Splintering the Shards he did; she also believes she could "deal" with him if he becomes an issue. One of Autonomy\'s avatars, Patji, also expressed indifference, though he did indicate that a different avatar might be more receptive. There is also a Shard who just wants to survive that is aware of Odium\'s goals and is "smart enough" to stay away, though they have realized over time that may not be the best course of action. Harmony, who only became aware of the threat around the time of the True Desolation, is deeply concerned about Odium, but is unable to do much because of the conflicting nature of his powers.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28f599f5-dfa2-436e-9f47-0dd7d8ffe876'}, page_content="Cosmere - In a letter to Hoid, however, he did suggest that Valor might share some of his concern. The Ascension of Harmony \n\nEarly in the history of Scadrial, Preservation's Vessel, Leras, sacrificed most of his consciousness to imprison Ruin's mind in the Well of Ascension, preventing him from destroying the planet. In the process, Preservation also stole a piece of Ruin's power and crafted the Pits of Hathsin to hide it; the concentration of Investiture there formed a perpendicularity, which came to support an extensive system of interplanetary trade until Kelsier shattered all of the atium geodes in the Pits in . After the death of the Lord Ruler, Ruin was successfully able to manipulate Vin into taking up the Well's power and then releasing it, which allowed him to be free. Once free, Ruin was unable to immediately Splinter Preservation, but brought his power to bear against what remained of Leras, slowly killing the Vessel. The Ire, aware of Leras's impending death, sought to use a device to Connect one of their members to Preservation and Ascend in . The device, however, was stolen by Kelsier, who used it after Leras finally died, taking up the portion of Preservation's power that Leras had still been holding and preventing Ruin from Splintering Preservation. Kelsier continued to hold that power until Vin, Leras's chosen successor, had her link to Ruin—a Hemalurgically charged earring—removed, whereupon she began absorbing the mists and Kelsier released the portion of Preservation's power he held, allowing Vin to Ascend and become the Vessel of Preservation. During the Battle of Hathsin, Vin then sacrificed herself in order to kill Ruin's Vessel, Ati. Leras, when he held Preservation's power, had foreseen all this and planned for both Ruin and Preservation to be left without a Vessel so that Sazed could take up both Shards and their Intents could moderate each other. As a result of one person holding both Shards, Ruin and Preservation's power began to intermingle, and Sazed became known as Harmony. It is considered a single Shard, much like a king of two countries is still just one king. This consolidation of two Shards with one Vessel caused some of the other Shards—notably Odium and Autonomy—to feel threatened or even scared and to begin making plans for dealing with Harmony. Splintering of Honor and the True Desolation \nSometime after the Recreance, Odium finally managed to Splinter Honor, even though Cultivation was assisting Honor in some way. Honor, however, had prepared for this eventuality by, among other things, giving the Stormfather the power to create new honorspren and recording a series of visions for the Stormfather to show to potential Bondsmiths. Approximately 4,500 Rosharan years (4,950 standard years) after the Last Desolation, Odium and his servants developed the Everstorm to allow the Fused to circumvent the Oathpact and return to Roshar without Talenel breaking. As Odium's forces grew closer to enacting their plan, Hoid began reaching out to the dragon Frost and several of the Shards, asking them to help in keeping the cosmere safe from Odium. Aside from Harmony, who had not previously been aware of the threat Odium posed, they all rejected Hoid's request as they considered Odium's binding to the Rosharan system sufficient. After years of preparation, Odium's servants successfully guided the listeners to summoning the Everstorm,\nbeginning the True Desolation. With the advent of the Everstorm on , Dalinar Kholin founded a coalition of monarchs to oppose Odium's forces and the Knights Radiant were re-established. Acting on the advice Honor had left in his series of visions, they pushed Odium to agree to a contest of champions so that he could be forced to leave Roshar in peace for some period of time. Odium eventually agreed to such a contest during the Battle of Thaylen Field, but withdrew before the terms for the contest could be set. About a year later, in , Odium returned to set the terms for the contest. Ultimately he and Dalinar agreed that, no matter the outcome of the contest, Odium would remain bound to the Rosharan system and would cease hostilities against the coalition of monarchs, with only the fate of Alethkar, Herdaz, and Dalinar's soul depending on the outcome of the contest. The protections specified for Hoid in Dalinar's initial, written, proposed contract also appear to be in effect. The contest is set for the tenth hour of the tenth day of the month Palah at the top of Urithiru. Shortly after Odium came to this agreement with Dalinar, Taravangian orchestrated an attack on Odium with Nightblood, which killed Odium's Vessel, Rayse."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28f599f5-dfa2-436e-9f47-0dd7d8ffe876'}, page_content="Cosmere - Taravangian then Ascended as the new Vessel of Odium; he remains bound by the agreement Rayse made with Dalinar and plans to beat Dalinar. Trell and Scadrial \n\nSometime after the Catacendre, Kelsier founded the Ghostbloods for the purpose of protecting Scadrial. As a result of the moves he was making, others began reaching out to the rest of the cosmere for power, though they were not fully aware what they were doing. Their calls were answered by the Shard Autonomy, who began to make good on the ancient religion of Trelagism that she had founded in the classical era of Scadrial and to create a new avatar of herself on Scadrial, Trell. She backed the Set and the kandra Paalm in their efforts to break Scadrial from Harmony's influence and bring it under her control, while also preparing to destroy the planet if necessary to prevent it from becoming a threat. As Autonomy's plans neared completion in , she trapped Harmony in a shroud that sharply limited his ability to see the future and prepared the leader of the Set, Telsin Ladrian to become the avatar Trell. Both of her plans for Scadrial were ultimately stopped, as Waxillium Ladrian and Wayne killed Telsin and prematurely detonated the bomb planned to destroy Elendel while Marasi Colms, with help from the Ghostbloods, drained and collapsed the perpendicularity Autonomy had created for her men of gold and red to travel through, preventing them from destroying the planet. Autonomy then withdrew from Scadrial, saying that they had proven themselves for the moment, but that they plan to return."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28f599f5-dfa2-436e-9f47-0dd7d8ffe876'}, page_content='Cosmere - The Space Age \nEventually, mankind discovered a method for faster-than-light travel in the physical realm. This led to growing communication between planets, and the formation of the Silverlight Codes of Interplanetary Conduct. Waystations were also constructed throughout the cosmere. This greater communication led to growing conflicts between planets, and the birth of a growing arms race that consumed most developed planets. Although during this era, many civilizations remained planetbound. Some parties decided to bring technology to less developed planets, such as the Ones Above bringing their technology to the people of the First of the Sun.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Before the Shattering', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1860dbaf-668c-4b78-833b-d33010503138'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Before the Shattering \n\nAt some point, the Dawnshards were used to create the cosmere. The first humans lived on Yolen and were created by Adonalsium. At some point, a poorly-understood and parasitic ecosystem hostile to humans, known as fainlife, began to develop on Yolen. It began to spread and overtake the landscape, though the other inhabitants eventually learned how to keep it in check. Yolen was also home to the Sho Del, the fainlife equivalent of humans, and dragons. Information about fainlife remains accessible enough in the modern cosmere that Khriss was able to mention it to cosmere-aware people without need for explanation. Prior to the Shattering, Yolen's technology was Bronze Age. During this time, Adonalsium created several planets, including the entire Rosharan system. Most of the planets in the cosmere existed and were named prior to the Shattering, though worldhopping was much less common at the time. Investiture still existed prior to the Shattering, though its form was different."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Before the Shattering', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1860dbaf-668c-4b78-833b-d33010503138'}, page_content='Cosmere - During this time, there was a plot to destroy Adonalsium, but it failed. Hoid, the dragon Frost, and the original Vessels all lived before the Shattering.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Shattering of Adonalsium', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cfac5951-7d58-4ae3-b9b4-0053c9b2c67c'}, page_content='Cosmere -  The Shattering of Adonalsium \n\nEventually, around ten-thousand years before the True Desolation, a group of people that opposed Adonalsium came together and plotted its destruction. This group included people of all three sapient species on Yolen: humans, dragons, and Sho Del. To achieve their goal, they created a weapon that utilized the Dawnshards. In an event known as the Shattering of Adonalsium, the weapon was used to "undo" Adonalsium, splitting it into the sixteen Shards; the weapon was expended in the process, though remnants of it exist in the Physical Realm and are responsible for Hoid\'s immortality. As part of the Shattering, sixteen of the people who had opposed Adonalsium took up the new Shards and became the first Vessels. There was some sort of force that caused Adonalsium to shatter into the Shards that it did, and the distribution of the Shards to the Vessels was not random. The Shattering occurred on Yolen, though there is some "weirdness" with regard to Yolen and location, and occurred all at once. As a result of the Shattering, all Investiture in the cosmere became aligned with one of the sixteen Shards. Hoid was loosely involved in the plot to Shatter Adonalsium and was present at the Shattering. He also had the opportunity to take a Shard, but turned it down. He and Frost both knew the original Vessels personally. After the Shattering, the new Vessels made some sort of agreement to not interfere with each other, though the exact agreement was somewhat ambiguous and the Vessels who suggested it did not make sure to get a formal oath from the others.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Shattering of Adonalsium', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cfac5951-7d58-4ae3-b9b4-0053c9b2c67c'}, page_content='Cosmere - Regardless, the Shards then went their separate ways. Most settled on a planet, though Virtuosity instead chose to instead travel around the cosmere before eventually Splintering herself near the UTol system. Some chose to go off on their own, while others stayed together with other Shards. Around this time, Ruin and Preservation created the planet Scadrial, using the non-fain parts of Yolen as a guide.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "Odium's Quest", 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cfffca03-1935-4cb9-b16e-7dadc81cebfd'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Odium's Quest \n\nSoon after the Shattering, or possibly even beforehand, the Vessel of Odium, Rayse, decided he wanted to become the strongest being in the cosmere. However, Odium is, by its nature, selfish and Rayse did not want the Intent of an additional Shard to make him into something else, so he instead decided to destroy the other Shards so that there would be no one left to challenge him. To do so, he developed a way to Splinter a Shard's power, which also results in the death of its Vessel. Odium's first target was Ambition, as he feared that it would be a threat to him. However, while searching for Ambition, over 7700 years before the True Desolation, he encountered the Shards Devotion and Dominion on Sel and attacked them, likely because he could argue they had violated the Vessel's pact to not interfere with each other. In the ensuing battle, Odium successfully splintered Devotion and Dominion and killed their Vessels, Aona and Skai. In order to ensure that no one could take up their Shards, he then somehow moved most of their Investiture from the Spiritual Realm into the Cognitive Realm, which made the Selish Cognitive Realm incredibly dangerous and the Selish Invested Arts location-dependent. Sometime after he Splintered Devotion and Dominion, Odium finally found Ambition, who had settled in the Threnodite system. Odium attacked and mortally wounded Ambition, though the Shard fled and was ultimately Splintered elsewhere, in a battle with Odium and Mercy. These clashes resulted in a wound in the Spiritual Realm and left ripped-off chunks of Ambition's power in the Threnodite system, which twisted the people and planet of Threnody. A long time after the Shattering, Odium got permission from Honor and Cultivation to join them in the Rosharan system. Odium never intended to Invest himself in a planet, but, at some point, he became Invested in the Rosharan system to the point where he would now have to leave some of his power behind or forcibly tear it out in order to leave. Early in his time in the Rosharan system, Odium took an interest in the humans living on Ashyn and encouraged them to experiment with Surgebinding. Those experiments, combined with at least one Dawnshard, set the entire planet on fire, leaving it largely uninhabitable outside of a few small pockets, causing most of the population to flee to Roshar. At some point while he was in the Rosharan system, Honor and Cultivation used their power to trap him there."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Odium's Quest", 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cfffca03-1935-4cb9-b16e-7dadc81cebfd'}, page_content='Cosmere - As a result, Odium has since been waging a war to free himself from whatever binds him to the system so that he can continue his quest. To that end, he Splintered off pieces of his power to create the Fused, the Unmade, and voidspren, and also Invested in the Rosharan system enough to create and grant access to Invested Art known as Voidbinding. When the Fused first appeared, Honor created the Heralds, who could seal the Fused on Braize, though the Fused tortured the Heralds into allowing them to return to Roshar. Every time a Herald broke, a Desolation would begin and the Heralds and Knights Radiant would fight the Fused until they could be sealed on Braize again. This situation continued for millennia and the Shards remained at a stalemate, especially after nine of the Heralds abandoned the Oathpact, leaving it to Talenel alone, who was better able to withstand the torture on Braize. Odium\'s repeated clashes with other Shards have left him with "scars that do not heal," forcing him to become more careful about the battles he engages in. Many of the other Shards are aware of Odium\'s actions, though most do not seem to consider him a problem, as long as he remains bound to the Rosharan system. Endowment is currently indifferent to him and thinks he was justified in Splintering the Shards he did; she also believes she could "deal" with him if he becomes an issue. One of Autonomy\'s avatars, Patji, also expressed indifference, though he did indicate that a different avatar might be more receptive. There is also a Shard who just wants to survive that is aware of Odium\'s goals and is "smart enough" to stay away, though they have realized over time that may not be the best course of action.'), Document(metadata={'heading': "Odium's Quest", 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cfffca03-1935-4cb9-b16e-7dadc81cebfd'}, page_content='Cosmere - Harmony, who only became aware of the threat around the time of the True Desolation, is deeply concerned about Odium, but is unable to do much because of the conflicting nature of his powers. In a letter to Hoid, however, he did suggest that Valor might share some of his concern.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Ascension of Harmony', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'dc2dd77a-6005-4147-bc88-b145d0bd2fa9'}, page_content="Cosmere -  The Ascension of Harmony \n\nEarly in the history of Scadrial, Preservation's Vessel, Leras, sacrificed most of his consciousness to imprison Ruin's mind in the Well of Ascension, preventing him from destroying the planet. In the process, Preservation also stole a piece of Ruin's power and crafted the Pits of Hathsin to hide it; the concentration of Investiture there formed a perpendicularity, which came to support an extensive system of interplanetary trade until Kelsier shattered all of the atium geodes in the Pits in . After the death of the Lord Ruler, Ruin was successfully able to manipulate Vin into taking up the Well's power and then releasing it, which allowed him to be free. Once free, Ruin was unable to immediately Splinter Preservation, but brought his power to bear against what remained of Leras, slowly killing the Vessel. The Ire, aware of Leras's impending death, sought to use a device to Connect one of their members to Preservation and Ascend in . The device, however, was stolen by Kelsier, who used it after Leras finally died, taking up the portion of Preservation's power that Leras had still been holding and preventing Ruin from Splintering Preservation. Kelsier continued to hold that power until Vin, Leras's chosen successor, had her link to Ruin—a Hemalurgically charged earring—removed, whereupon she began absorbing the mists and Kelsier released the portion of Preservation's power he held, allowing Vin to Ascend and become the Vessel of Preservation. During the Battle of Hathsin, Vin then sacrificed herself in order to kill Ruin's Vessel, Ati. Leras, when he held Preservation's power, had foreseen all this and planned for both Ruin and Preservation to be left without a Vessel so that Sazed could take up both Shards and their Intents could moderate each other. As a result of one person holding both Shards, Ruin and Preservation's power began to intermingle, and Sazed became known as Harmony. It is considered a single Shard, much like a king of two countries is still just one king."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Ascension of Harmony', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'dc2dd77a-6005-4147-bc88-b145d0bd2fa9'}, page_content='Cosmere - This consolidation of two Shards with one Vessel caused some of the other Shards—notably Odium and Autonomy—to feel threatened or even scared and to begin making plans for dealing with Harmony.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Splintering of Honor and the True Desolation', 'order': 22, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8e47f68d-1ec8-46b7-876b-078d53ed7359'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Splintering of Honor and the True Desolation \nSometime after the Recreance, Odium finally managed to Splinter Honor, even though Cultivation was assisting Honor in some way. Honor, however, had prepared for this eventuality by, among other things, giving the Stormfather the power to create new honorspren and recording a series of visions for the Stormfather to show to potential Bondsmiths. Approximately 4,500 Rosharan years (4,950 standard years) after the Last Desolation, Odium and his servants developed the Everstorm to allow the Fused to circumvent the Oathpact and return to Roshar without Talenel breaking. As Odium's forces grew closer to enacting their plan, Hoid began reaching out to the dragon Frost and several of the Shards, asking them to help in keeping the cosmere safe from Odium. Aside from Harmony, who had not previously been aware of the threat Odium posed, they all rejected Hoid's request as they considered Odium's binding to the Rosharan system sufficient. After years of preparation, Odium's servants successfully guided the listeners to summoning the Everstorm,\nbeginning the True Desolation. With the advent of the Everstorm on , Dalinar Kholin founded a coalition of monarchs to oppose Odium's forces and the Knights Radiant were re-established. Acting on the advice Honor had left in his series of visions, they pushed Odium to agree to a contest of champions so that he could be forced to leave Roshar in peace for some period of time."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Splintering of Honor and the True Desolation', 'order': 22, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8e47f68d-1ec8-46b7-876b-078d53ed7359'}, page_content="Cosmere - Odium eventually agreed to such a contest during the Battle of Thaylen Field, but withdrew before the terms for the contest could be set. About a year later, in , Odium returned to set the terms for the contest. Ultimately he and Dalinar agreed that, no matter the outcome of the contest, Odium would remain bound to the Rosharan system and would cease hostilities against the coalition of monarchs, with only the fate of Alethkar, Herdaz, and Dalinar's soul depending on the outcome of the contest. The protections specified for Hoid in Dalinar's initial, written, proposed contract also appear to be in effect. The contest is set for the tenth hour of the tenth day of the month Palah at the top of Urithiru. Shortly after Odium came to this agreement with Dalinar, Taravangian orchestrated an attack on Odium with Nightblood, which killed Odium's Vessel, Rayse. Taravangian then Ascended as the new Vessel of Odium; he remains bound by the agreement Rayse made with Dalinar and plans to beat Dalinar."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trell and Scadrial', 'order': 23, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5560c2f4-f875-4de8-80ed-648516e188fd'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Trell and Scadrial \n\nSometime after the Catacendre, Kelsier founded the Ghostbloods for the purpose of protecting Scadrial. As a result of the moves he was making, others began reaching out to the rest of the cosmere for power, though they were not fully aware what they were doing.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trell and Scadrial', 'order': 23, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5560c2f4-f875-4de8-80ed-648516e188fd'}, page_content="Cosmere - Their calls were answered by the Shard Autonomy, who began to make good on the ancient religion of Trelagism that she had founded in the classical era of Scadrial and to create a new avatar of herself on Scadrial, Trell. She backed the Set and the kandra Paalm in their efforts to break Scadrial from Harmony's influence and bring it under her control, while also preparing to destroy the planet if necessary to prevent it from becoming a threat. As Autonomy's plans neared completion in , she trapped Harmony in a shroud that sharply limited his ability to see the future and prepared the leader of the Set, Telsin Ladrian to become the avatar Trell. Both of her plans for Scadrial were ultimately stopped, as Waxillium Ladrian and Wayne killed Telsin and prematurely detonated the bomb planned to destroy Elendel while Marasi Colms, with help from the Ghostbloods, drained and collapsed the perpendicularity Autonomy had created for her men of gold and red to travel through, preventing them from destroying the planet. Autonomy then withdrew from Scadrial, saying that they had proven themselves for the moment, but that they plan to return."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Space Age', 'order': 24, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2d34bdc7-c6f3-467f-8c70-451acc728b9b'}, page_content='Cosmere -  The Space Age \nEventually, mankind discovered a method for faster-than-light travel in the physical realm. This led to growing communication between planets, and the formation of the Silverlight Codes of Interplanetary Conduct.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Space Age', 'order': 24, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2d34bdc7-c6f3-467f-8c70-451acc728b9b'}, page_content='Cosmere - Waystations were also constructed throughout the cosmere. This greater communication led to growing conflicts between planets, and the birth of a growing arms race that consumed most developed planets. Although during this era, many civilizations remained planetbound. Some parties decided to bring technology to less developed planets, such as the Ones Above bringing their technology to the people of the First of the Sun.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldhoppers', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '322bccb2-ec0a-470d-a935-01882dce3784'}, page_content="Cosmere -  Worldhoppers \nSome people who are aware of the broader cosmere have learned how to travel between planets and are known as worldhoppers. Since space in the Cognitive Realm is linked to how people think about that region, most of outer space is extremely compressed in the Cognitive Realm. Therefore, if one could shift from the Physical to the Cognitive Realm, they could quickly travel between planets. The most common method for transfer to the Cognitive Realm is by going through a perpendicularity, though it is also possible with the Surge of Transportation. Planets are not equally easy to access through the Cognitive Realm and planets may rapidly become less accessible due to local events. While Nalthis is generally easy and safe to reach, and even has customs for travelers to go through, it seems to be more of an outlier in this regard—travel to Sel is incredibly dangerous due to the power of Devotion and Dominion being stuck in the Cognitive Realm, a well-established mercantile system running through Ruin's Perpendicularity on Scadrial is upended overnight when Kelsier destroys the atium in the Pits of Hathsin, Roshar fluctuates between being welcoming and being dangerous, depending on the stage of the conflict between Honor and Odium, Taldain is inaccessible as Autonomy has closed it off from the rest of the cosmere, and travel to Bjendal is disrupted by unknown events. As a result of these difficulties, people look for other methods of travel. While it may be possible to worldhop using the Spiritual Realm, the primary other method available is faster-than-light travel through space in the Physical Realm. There are multiple ways to create ships that are capable of such travel; the Surge of Transportation and Allomancy both provide viable bases for developing ships that can do so, though the exact mechanics are unknown. In total, the number of people traveling between planets probably numbers somewhere in the thousands, though this may increase after the development of faster-than-light travel through the Physical Realm. Some of these people are involved in the broader events of the cosmere, but many just want to immigrate to another planet. There is no universal language that all worldhoppers speak, though some can use Connection to speak local languages. These worldhoppers drive a thriving interplanetary trade system that includes the trade of mundane objects from different worlds, rare items like paintings from the Court of the Gods, and at least one courier service. The most important commodity, however, is Investiture, though it is difficult to transport off of its home world as it is strongly Connected to that world and its Shard. Hoid \n\nHoid is a mysterious worldhopper who has been alive since before the Shattering of Adonalsium and was present for that event. He has collected a variety of Invested items from around the cosmere and gained access to multiple Invested Arts. His long-term goals are unclear, but he is an adamant opponent of Odium's attempts to become the sole god of the cosmere. He has written to Frost, Endowment, Autonomy, and Harmony, hoping to enlist their help in dealing with Odium, though only Harmony has responded positively."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldhoppers', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '322bccb2-ec0a-470d-a935-01882dce3784'}, page_content="Cosmere - He has some ability to manipulate Fortune, which lets him learn where and when he needs to be to advance his goals, though he often doesn't know why being somewhere is important. Worldhopping Groups \n The Seventeenth Shard \n\nThe Seventeenth Shard is a group of worldhoppers that seeks to research and study the various worlds of the cosmere without interfering in existing cultures. They believe the Shards separated for a reason and want to minimize the risk of conflict between the Shards. Frost may have some influence over them, either formally or informally."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldhoppers', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '322bccb2-ec0a-470d-a935-01882dce3784'}, page_content='Cosmere - They are worried about Hoid, as they fear his actions on planets will exacerbate Shardic conflict and, from at least  to  on the Rosharan calendar, unsuccessfully tried to hunt him down, though they have larger objectives as well. Silverlight \n\nSilverlight is a fully-functional city in the Cognitive Realm where many worldhoppers have settled down. Its population, however, also includes many people who are born in the city and spend their entire lives there, including a notable group of Southern Scadrians. The city is home to multiple universities, whose scholars possess a great deal of knowledge about the nature of the cosmere and will conduct expeditions to investigate unusual workings of Investiture to further that knowledge. At least one of those universities was founded by the researcher Khriss, the most knowledgeable person in the cosmere and author of the Ars Arcana. As a result of these efforts and playing host to interactions between societies from across the cosmere, Silverlight enjoys scientific learning and progress that is without parallel in the rest of the cosmere. The city is also home to at least one mercantile enterprise, whose services include an interplanetary postal service that makes use of unknown Invested entities that read Connection to find the location of message recipients. The Ire \n\nThe Ire is a group of worldhopping Elantrians. They existed prior to the Reod and were able to weather it, though they were off-world when it occurred. Their objectives are unclear, though they did attempt to Ascend one of their members as the Vessel of Preservation after Leras died. At that time, they were at least associated with a group whose forces were keeping the Shades of Threnody contained in the Threnodite system. They have some method of storing and transporting Investiture, which they use to sustain themselves and trade with others, such as the honorspren of Lasting Integrity. The Ghostbloods \nThe Ghostbloods is a cosmere-wide secret society created by Kelsier for the purpose of protecting Scadrial from other forces in the cosmere. To that end, they seek to push technological progress forward and build alliances with other planets.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldhoppers', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '322bccb2-ec0a-470d-a935-01882dce3784'}, page_content="Cosmere - They have recruited several worldhoppers and actively recruit from the Seventeenth Shard's field agents, though the two organizations do not work together. They have also recruited at least one Sleepless, though they are also worried about the Sleepless trying to take over their organization. The Ghostbloods on Roshar are working on finding a way to transport Stormlight from Roshar, where it is easily accessible, to places where Investiture is harder to obtain, though members operating beyond Scadrial are somewhat removed from Kelsier's direct control. Other Notable Worldhoppers \n\nMost, if not all, of the Five Scholars of Nalthis were worldhoppers and are well-regarded by the cosmere-aware scholarly community as pioneers of the study of Investiture and Realmatic Theory. After learning from one of the Scholars, Vasher, Vivenna became a worldhopper as well. Felt was involved in trade through the Pits of Hathsin and has been involved in several different worldhopping groups over the years. The dragon Frost is extremely knowledgeable about the cosmere, but is not actually a worldhopper, as he has not left Yolen. The Sleepless are present on several planets across the cosmere, though most have chosen to settle on Roshar and only the Rosharan ones are capable of imitating humans. Additionally, there are several kandra from Scadrial who have become worldhoppers, though they were released from their contract with Harmony sometime after Autonomy's initial incursion on Scadrial."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hoid', 'order': 26, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a59c1c54-3dee-4fcd-babb-e455be3bc78b'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Hoid \n\nHoid is a mysterious worldhopper who has been alive since before the Shattering of Adonalsium and was present for that event. He has collected a variety of Invested items from around the cosmere and gained access to multiple Invested Arts.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hoid', 'order': 26, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a59c1c54-3dee-4fcd-babb-e455be3bc78b'}, page_content="Cosmere - His long-term goals are unclear, but he is an adamant opponent of Odium's attempts to become the sole god of the cosmere. He has written to Frost, Endowment, Autonomy, and Harmony, hoping to enlist their help in dealing with Odium, though only Harmony has responded positively. He has some ability to manipulate Fortune, which lets him learn where and when he needs to be to advance his goals, though he often doesn't know why being somewhere is important."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldhopping Groups', 'order': 27, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cffe9e76-9e2f-4193-89c5-b7e9bff2e924'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Worldhopping Groups \n The Seventeenth Shard \n\nThe Seventeenth Shard is a group of worldhoppers that seeks to research and study the various worlds of the cosmere without interfering in existing cultures. They believe the Shards separated for a reason and want to minimize the risk of conflict between the Shards. Frost may have some influence over them, either formally or informally. They are worried about Hoid, as they fear his actions on planets will exacerbate Shardic conflict and, from at least  to  on the Rosharan calendar, unsuccessfully tried to hunt him down, though they have larger objectives as well. Silverlight \n\nSilverlight is a fully-functional city in the Cognitive Realm where many worldhoppers have settled down. Its population, however, also includes many people who are born in the city and spend their entire lives there, including a notable group of Southern Scadrians. The city is home to multiple universities, whose scholars possess a great deal of knowledge about the nature of the cosmere and will conduct expeditions to investigate unusual workings of Investiture to further that knowledge. At least one of those universities was founded by the researcher Khriss, the most knowledgeable person in the cosmere and author of the Ars Arcana. As a result of these efforts and playing host to interactions between societies from across the cosmere, Silverlight enjoys scientific learning and progress that is without parallel in the rest of the cosmere. The city is also home to at least one mercantile enterprise, whose services include an interplanetary postal service that makes use of unknown Invested entities that read Connection to find the location of message recipients. The Ire \n\nThe Ire is a group of worldhopping Elantrians. They existed prior to the Reod and were able to weather it, though they were off-world when it occurred. Their objectives are unclear, though they did attempt to Ascend one of their members as the Vessel of Preservation after Leras died. At that time, they were at least associated with a group whose forces were keeping the Shades of Threnody contained in the Threnodite system. They have some method of storing and transporting Investiture, which they use to sustain themselves and trade with others, such as the honorspren of Lasting Integrity. The Ghostbloods \nThe Ghostbloods is a cosmere-wide secret society created by Kelsier for the purpose of protecting Scadrial from other forces in the cosmere. To that end, they seek to push technological progress forward and build alliances with other planets.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldhopping Groups', 'order': 27, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cffe9e76-9e2f-4193-89c5-b7e9bff2e924'}, page_content="Cosmere - They have recruited several worldhoppers and actively recruit from the Seventeenth Shard's field agents, though the two organizations do not work together. They have also recruited at least one Sleepless, though they are also worried about the Sleepless trying to take over their organization. The Ghostbloods on Roshar are working on finding a way to transport Stormlight from Roshar, where it is easily accessible, to places where Investiture is harder to obtain, though members operating beyond Scadrial are somewhat removed from Kelsier's direct control."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Seventeenth Shard', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'dfb78460-e46c-4918-9c96-50cb49a1be6e'}, page_content='Cosmere -  The Seventeenth Shard \n\nThe Seventeenth Shard is a group of worldhoppers that seeks to research and study the various worlds of the cosmere without interfering in existing cultures. They believe the Shards separated for a reason and want to minimize the risk of conflict between the Shards.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Seventeenth Shard', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'dfb78460-e46c-4918-9c96-50cb49a1be6e'}, page_content='Cosmere - Frost may have some influence over them, either formally or informally. They are worried about Hoid, as they fear his actions on planets will exacerbate Shardic conflict and, from at least  to  on the Rosharan calendar, unsuccessfully tried to hunt him down, though they have larger objectives as well.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Silverlight', 'order': 29, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '66302088-d892-4d2d-bc55-a036f99771a9'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Silverlight \n\nSilverlight is a fully-functional city in the Cognitive Realm where many worldhoppers have settled down. Its population, however, also includes many people who are born in the city and spend their entire lives there, including a notable group of Southern Scadrians.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Silverlight', 'order': 29, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '66302088-d892-4d2d-bc55-a036f99771a9'}, page_content='Cosmere - The city is home to multiple universities, whose scholars possess a great deal of knowledge about the nature of the cosmere and will conduct expeditions to investigate unusual workings of Investiture to further that knowledge. At least one of those universities was founded by the researcher Khriss, the most knowledgeable person in the cosmere and author of the Ars Arcana. As a result of these efforts and playing host to interactions between societies from across the cosmere, Silverlight enjoys scientific learning and progress that is without parallel in the rest of the cosmere. The city is also home to at least one mercantile enterprise, whose services include an interplanetary postal service that makes use of unknown Invested entities that read Connection to find the location of message recipients.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Ire', 'order': 30, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '031fd8fc-7a8f-401b-8324-55edf5d41805'}, page_content='Cosmere -  The Ire \n\nThe Ire is a group of worldhopping Elantrians. They existed prior to the Reod and were able to weather it, though they were off-world when it occurred.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Ire', 'order': 30, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '031fd8fc-7a8f-401b-8324-55edf5d41805'}, page_content='Cosmere - Their objectives are unclear, though they did attempt to Ascend one of their members as the Vessel of Preservation after Leras died. At that time, they were at least associated with a group whose forces were keeping the Shades of Threnody contained in the Threnodite system. They have some method of storing and transporting Investiture, which they use to sustain themselves and trade with others, such as the honorspren of Lasting Integrity.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Ghostbloods', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9c3bf71d-f87c-44e0-bd81-b579997ea809'}, page_content='Cosmere -  The Ghostbloods \nThe Ghostbloods is a cosmere-wide secret society created by Kelsier for the purpose of protecting Scadrial from other forces in the cosmere. To that end, they seek to push technological progress forward and build alliances with other planets.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Ghostbloods', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9c3bf71d-f87c-44e0-bd81-b579997ea809'}, page_content="Cosmere - They have recruited several worldhoppers and actively recruit from the Seventeenth Shard's field agents, though the two organizations do not work together. They have also recruited at least one Sleepless, though they are also worried about the Sleepless trying to take over their organization. The Ghostbloods on Roshar are working on finding a way to transport Stormlight from Roshar, where it is easily accessible, to places where Investiture is harder to obtain, though members operating beyond Scadrial are somewhat removed from Kelsier's direct control."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Other Notable Worldhoppers', 'order': 32, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8e285f27-e4b1-4d0a-b64e-1dd657d2a782'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Other Notable Worldhoppers \n\nMost, if not all, of the Five Scholars of Nalthis were worldhoppers and are well-regarded by the cosmere-aware scholarly community as pioneers of the study of Investiture and Realmatic Theory. After learning from one of the Scholars, Vasher, Vivenna became a worldhopper as well. Felt was involved in trade through the Pits of Hathsin and has been involved in several different worldhopping groups over the years. The dragon Frost is extremely knowledgeable about the cosmere, but is not actually a worldhopper, as he has not left Yolen. The Sleepless are present on several planets across the cosmere, though most have chosen to settle on Roshar and only the Rosharan ones are capable of imitating humans.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Other Notable Worldhoppers', 'order': 32, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8e285f27-e4b1-4d0a-b64e-1dd657d2a782'}, page_content="Cosmere - Additionally, there are several kandra from Scadrial who have become worldhoppers, though they were released from their contract with Harmony sometime after Autonomy's initial incursion on Scadrial."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Development', 'order': 33, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6e2d8cc3-9481-45b4-8617-21a60f49d42d'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Development \n\nWhen Brandon was beginning to write and trying to get published, he loved gigantic epic fantasy series. He knew, however, that starting with a big series might not be the best idea.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Development', 'order': 33, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6e2d8cc3-9481-45b4-8617-21a60f49d42d'}, page_content='Cosmere - If he wrote four books in a series, and the first one didn\'t get published, he couldn\'t submit his sequels, so he decided instead to focus on standalone stories. However, he still loved the idea of a huge epic series, so he decided to create a "hidden" epic to link his novels together. Brandon had seen other authors who made a single universe for all their books, like Isaac Asimov, but didn\'t like how Asimov had to retcon and shoehorn things together to connect his books, and so wanted to build the cosmere from the beginning, so it would always be consistent. Some ideas that came into the worldbuilding of the cosmere came from Plato\'s theory of forms, which contributed to the development of Realmatic Theory. In this, the distinction of what is perceived as "ideal" and what is the true ideal is important: true ideals have much to do with the Spiritual Realm, while people\'s perception of ideals deals with the Cognitive Realm. Another influence is Spinoza, with the idea that God is in everything. Brandon also incorporated the idea of a "unifying theory of everything" from physics into the magic in the cosmere. All magics have underlying rules, and are derived from a single unified theory of magic. The cosmere sequence has a clear story that Brandon wants to tell and is fairly firmly outlined as 35 novels, plus a variety of novellas and other works, with the Dragonsteel series, Mistborn series, and The Stormlight Archive forming the core of that story. Dragonsteel will tell Hoid\'s backstory and the story of the Shattering of Adonalsium; Mistborn will have four series, following Scadrial from the Final Empire to the development of faster-than-light travel and the interaction between the various planets; The Stormlight Archive will be split into two arcs of five books each and is the story of the clash between the people of Roshar and Odium. Generally, knowledge of the cosmere as a whole will not be necessary until Dragonsteel and the final Mistborn trilogy, which are the beginning and the conclusion respectively of the cosmere sequence\n\nBrandon does not feel that the cosmere is restrictive to his writing. Though cosmere novels are intensive, as they require more thorough planning and continuity maintenance, Brandon also has an internal wiki and people like Peter and Karen Ahlstrom who help him keep the cosmere on track. When Brandon feels like he needs a break from the more stringent requirements of the cosmere, he\'ll turn to work on a less intensive novel or novella, which are almost always non-cosmere. If there is a concept he really wants to write but doesn\'t fit in the limitations of the cosmere, he moves it into a non-cosmere book. For example, The Rithmatist started as a cosmere novel, and its magics take many elements from cosmere magics, but Brandon decided that he did not want a version of Earth in the cosmere, and so moved it to its own universe. Brandon does generally plan out which cosmere hints to give to fans, but sometimes he gives hints on the fly. Usually, fans are able to pry much more than he initially intended to tell.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bibliography of the Cosmere', 'order': 34, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5ad483e7-a279-4a40-b6a5-ed4fe7661bb4'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Bibliography of the Cosmere \nPublished Works of the Cosmere Publication Year Title Series Planet Length2005 Elantris Elantris trilogy #1 Sel Novel2006 The Hope of Elantris Elantris trilogy #1.5 Sel Short Story Mistborn: The Final Empire Mistborn (Era 1) #1 Scadrial Novel2007 The Well of Ascension Mistborn (Era 1) #2 Scadrial Novel2008 The Hero of Ages Mistborn (Era 1) #3 Scadrial Novel2009 Warbreaker Standalone Novel Nalthis Novel2010 The Way of Kings The Stormlight Archive #1 Roshar Novel2011 The Alloy of Law Mistborn (Era 2) #1 Scadrial Novel The Eleventh Metal Mistborn (Era 1) #0.5 Scadrial Short Story2012 The Emperor\'s Soul Standalone Novella Sel Novella2013 Shadows for Silence in the Forests of Hell Standalone Novella Threnody Novella2014 Words of Radiance The Stormlight Archive #2 Roshar Novel Sixth of the Dusk Standalone Novella First of the Sun Novella Allomancer Jak and the Pits of Eltania Mistborn (Era 2) #1.5 Scadrial Short Story2015 Shadows of Self Mistborn (Era 2) #2 Scadrial Novel2016 The Bands of Mourning Mistborn (Era 2) #3 Scadrial Novel Mistborn: Secret History Mistborn (Era 1) #3.5 Scadrial Novella White Sand Volume 1 White Sand #1 Taldain Graphic Novel Edgedancer The Stormlight Archive #2.5 Roshar Novella Arcanum Unbounded Anthology  2017 Oathbringer The Stormlight Archive #3 Roshar Novel2018 White Sand Volume 2 White Sand #2 Taldain Graphic Novel2019 White Sand Volume 3 White Sand #3 Taldain Graphic Novel2020 Dawnshard The Stormlight Archive #3.5 Roshar Novella Rhythm of War The Stormlight Archive #4 Roshar Novel2022 The Lost Metal Mistborn (Era 2) #4 Scadrial Novel White Sand omnibus Anthology Taldain Graphic Novel2023 Tress of the Emerald Sea Standalone Novel Lumar Novel Yumi and the Nightmare Painter Standalone Novel Komashi Novel The Sunlit Man Standalone Novel Canticle Novel\n\n Forthcoming \n\nThe following are confirmed upcoming cosmere stories:\n Wind and Truth, the fifth and last book of the first arc of The Stormlight Archive, scheduled for release on December 6, 2024. Isles of the Emberdark, a novel set in the far future Cosmere announced as a Secret Project alongside the Backerkit campaign for the Words of Radiance leatherbound. It is scheduled to be released in 2025. Era 3 Mistborn trilogy, the next Mistborn series, set to take place when Scadrial has achieved a technology level similar to that of the 1980s. Brandon plans to start writing the first book in January 2025 and hopes to write all three books before the first one is released, like he did with Era 1. Elantris 2 and Elantris 3, the sequels to Elantris. Expected to be written after The Stormlight Archive book 5 and Mistborn Era 2 are done. "In a perfect world," Brandon would write them around the same time he writes Mistborn Era 3, but they may come later than that. Horneater, the working title of a Stormlight novella following Lunamor. It is currently planned to be written between Wind and Truth and Stormlight 6.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bibliography of the Cosmere', 'order': 34, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5ad483e7-a279-4a40-b6a5-ed4fe7661bb4'}, page_content="Cosmere - The second arc of The Stormlight Archive, which will consist of books six through ten of the series overall. In-world, book six will pick up about a decade after book five ends. Planned to be written after Mistborn Era 3 and possibly also the Elantris sequels are done. Nightblood, the sequel to Warbreaker. Likely won't be written until The Stormlight Archive book 5, the Elantris sequels, and Mistborn Era 3 are written. The Dragonsteel series, the origin story of Hoid and the Shattering of Adonalsium. Brandon is loosely working on it, but the series will not be written until The Stormlight Archive is finished. Era 4 Mistborn trilogy, the science fiction trilogy, with Hoid as a main character. Chronologically, this will be the last series in the cosmere sequence, and has much to do with the worlds coming together. Chronological Order \nBrandon has been somewhat evasive about the order of cosmere stories, so that the timeline remains flexible for future books that he writes. He has estimated that there are roughly 6000 years between the Shattering and the breaking of the Oathpact, with the latter event still predating White Sand. Although this figure is non-canonical and subject to change, Brandon has also stated that the books have mostly been released chronologically, which allows a rough timeline to be constructed:\n Dragonsteel series\n White Sand\n Elantris trilogy and The Hope of Elantris\n The Emperor's Soul\n Mistborn Era 1\n Warbreaker and Nightblood\n Shadows for Silence in the Forests of Hell\n The Stormlight Archive (books 1 through 5)\n Mistborn Era 2\n The Stormlight Archive (books 6 through 10)\n Mistborn Era 3\n Sixth of the Dusk\n The Sunlit Man\n Yumi and the Nightmare Painter\n Mistborn Era 4"), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Forthcoming', 'order': 35, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3cb42921-a811-48f1-aab8-5015c84a4e0f'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Forthcoming \n\nThe following are confirmed upcoming cosmere stories:\n Wind and Truth, the fifth and last book of the first arc of The Stormlight Archive, scheduled for release on December 6, 2024. Isles of the Emberdark, a novel set in the far future Cosmere announced as a Secret Project alongside the Backerkit campaign for the Words of Radiance leatherbound. It is scheduled to be released in 2025. Era 3 Mistborn trilogy, the next Mistborn series, set to take place when Scadrial has achieved a technology level similar to that of the 1980s. Brandon plans to start writing the first book in January 2025 and hopes to write all three books before the first one is released, like he did with Era 1. Elantris 2 and Elantris 3, the sequels to Elantris. Expected to be written after The Stormlight Archive book 5 and Mistborn Era 2 are done. "In a perfect world," Brandon would write them around the same time he writes Mistborn Era 3, but they may come later than that. Horneater, the working title of a Stormlight novella following Lunamor. It is currently planned to be written between Wind and Truth and Stormlight 6.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Forthcoming', 'order': 35, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3cb42921-a811-48f1-aab8-5015c84a4e0f'}, page_content="Cosmere - The second arc of The Stormlight Archive, which will consist of books six through ten of the series overall. In-world, book six will pick up about a decade after book five ends. Planned to be written after Mistborn Era 3 and possibly also the Elantris sequels are done. Nightblood, the sequel to Warbreaker. Likely won't be written until The Stormlight Archive book 5, the Elantris sequels, and Mistborn Era 3 are written. The Dragonsteel series, the origin story of Hoid and the Shattering of Adonalsium. Brandon is loosely working on it, but the series will not be written until The Stormlight Archive is finished. Era 4 Mistborn trilogy, the science fiction trilogy, with Hoid as a main character. Chronologically, this will be the last series in the cosmere sequence, and has much to do with the worlds coming together."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Chronological Order', 'order': 36, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '002c575b-e222-4ef4-afda-172b282590a0'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Chronological Order \nBrandon has been somewhat evasive about the order of cosmere stories, so that the timeline remains flexible for future books that he writes. He has estimated that there are roughly 6000 years between the Shattering and the breaking of the Oathpact, with the latter event still predating White Sand.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Chronological Order', 'order': 36, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '002c575b-e222-4ef4-afda-172b282590a0'}, page_content="Cosmere - Although this figure is non-canonical and subject to change, Brandon has also stated that the books have mostly been released chronologically, which allows a rough timeline to be constructed:\n Dragonsteel series\n White Sand\n Elantris trilogy and The Hope of Elantris\n The Emperor's Soul\n Mistborn Era 1\n Warbreaker and Nightblood\n Shadows for Silence in the Forests of Hell\n The Stormlight Archive (books 1 through 5)\n Mistborn Era 2\n The Stormlight Archive (books 6 through 10)\n Mistborn Era 3\n Sixth of the Dusk\n The Sunlit Man\n Yumi and the Nightmare Painter\n Mistborn Era 4"), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Further Reading', 'order': 37, 'parent_article': 'Cosmere', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '47b68fd8-22fc-4734-b071-4258731cc444'}, page_content='Cosmere -  Further Reading '), Document(metadata={'heading': "Honor's Perpendicularity", 'order': 0, 'parent_article': "Honor's Perpendicularity", 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '76cccfdc-65a1-4ef7-8ead-b40134506815'}, page_content="Honor's Perpendicularity - Honor's Perpendicularity is one of Roshar's two perpendicularities, alongside Cultivation's. It's considered highly dangerous and has a habit of moving around, appearing in various places at random."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Honor's Perpendicularity", 'order': 0, 'parent_article': "Honor's Perpendicularity", 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '76cccfdc-65a1-4ef7-8ead-b40134506815'}, page_content="Honor's Perpendicularity - What usually causes it to appear or vanish is unclear, as is how closely it is linked with the highstorms. During the True Desolation, Honor's Perpendicularity can be opened at will by the Bondsmith Dalinar. This was not possible for previous Bondsmiths. After Ishar saw Dalinar opening the perpendicularity, the Herald is able to replicate the feat."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'At Thaylen Field', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': "Honor's Perpendicularity", 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '31f47037-c477-41d1-9828-a395625c8ebc'}, page_content="Honor's Perpendicularity -  At Thaylen Field \n\nDalinar manages to summon Honor's perpendicularity in Thaylen City during the Battle of Thaylen Field, after swearing his Third Ideal as a Bondsmith. There, it takes the form of a column of golden light surrounding Dalinar, and seems to attract numerous gloryspren. Odium is terrified of its appearance, withdrawing from the battlefield almost as soon as he sees it. The perpendicularity collapses on its own after just a few moments, although the three Realms remain close for a short time longer. While open, the perpendicularity not only allows for people to cross over between Shadesmar and Roshar's Physical Realm, but also provides effectively unlimited Stormlight to the surrounding area, refilling all gemstones and allowing the Surgebinders present to use their powers to their full potential. It also causes Taln to regain some of his mental functions, as he acts cognizant of his surroundings while it is open. Moreover, Dalinar seems more cosmere-aware during that time, with knowledge and understanding of concepts he has never been taught, which seems to diminish shortly after the perpendicularity closes. It is possible that this is due to a temporary Ascension to the Shard."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'At Thaylen Field', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': "Honor's Perpendicularity", 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '31f47037-c477-41d1-9828-a395625c8ebc'}, page_content="Honor's Perpendicularity - In Shadesmar, the perpendicularity likewise manifests as a column of light, with the surrounding soul-beads melting together, creating solid ground. The Fused have a violent reaction to its opening, being blasted away as if by wind. Notably, the same doesn't happen to either humans or spren."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': "Honor's Perpendicularity", 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '76066b3a-0218-43a1-8491-958ac98c8ba4'}, page_content="Honor's Perpendicularity -  Trivia \n In a deleted scene from Words of Radiance, Honor's perpendicularity is a stable junction that would allow Jasnah to safely return from Shadesmar, with Ivory knowing its location. It's unknown if the canon for it changed later, or if it was a mistake that would've been picked in the editing phase, were the scene to remain in the book."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Redirects to Cephandrius', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cephandrius', 'keywords': 'Cephandrius', 'doc_id': '0f08d524-f505-45c8-b338-4ceff630e8b7'}, page_content='Cephandrius - Hoid'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hoid', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e267a6f4-1115-4160-b40e-27edec94ebb9'}, page_content='Hoid - Hoid is a worldhopper and Dawnshard that travels the cosmere, originally born on the planet Yolen before the Shattering. He was one of the major figures in the Shattering of Adonalsium, but avoided taking up a Shard himself, instead choosing to wander the cosmere pursing his unknown goals, often in the guise of a fool or storyteller.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hoid', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e267a6f4-1115-4160-b40e-27edec94ebb9'}, page_content='Hoid - He may be guided at times by a mysterious sense about where he should go, but not what he is to accomplish there. One of his major goals is the defeat of Rayse, the original Vessel of the Shard Odium. While Hoid has generally avoided direct involvement in the major events of the cosmere, he is oftentimes present in the periphery, influencing in large ways and small the people who will go on to alter the course of history, as well as occasionally taking on an apprentice to train at his side. Hoid has been present for events such as the restoration of the city of Elantris on Sel, the Catacendre of Scadrial, and the True Desolation of Roshar. Along the way he has gained access to a prodigious number of powerful Invested Arts and arcana, including Surgebinding, AonDor, Awakening, and Allomancy, among others.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance & Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2d55df7f-9b37-421f-8a78-b1af70cb93a3'}, page_content="Hoid -  Appearance & Personality \n\n Appearance \nHoid's appearance varies dramatically from book to book. He's often in disguise, which makes his true appearance difficult to ascertain."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance & Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2d55df7f-9b37-421f-8a78-b1af70cb93a3'}, page_content="Hoid - Couple this with the fact that he can Lightweave his appearance in order to look however he wants, it makes it nearly impossible to know for sure what he looks like. To the best of our knowledge, his face is lined, hawk-like and arrow shaped. Hoid is tall and thin and also has a sharp nose and jaw with delicate eyebrows. He tends to cock his head to one side and has keen blue eyes. Hoid's hair is white, though he was not born with that color and he occasionally dyes it. There is a particular reason for his hair being white. When he is on Roshar during the War of Reckoning and True Desolation, serving as King Elhokar Kholin's, and later Queen Jasnah Kholin's Wit, Hoid has the appearance of an Alethi man in his mid-30s with deep onyx hair. He wears a stiff black coat and carries a long thin sword at his waist. This blade is not magically Invested but has personal value to Hoid. It is a symbol of office for the King/Queen's Wit, though Hoid himself is not a skilled swordfighter. Personality \nHoid's true personality, while also usually disguised, is more easily seen as he occasionally drops whatever part he is playing."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance & Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2d55df7f-9b37-421f-8a78-b1af70cb93a3'}, page_content='Hoid - One of his overall most noticeable traits is his sharp wit and intelligence. The characters he plays often have a penchant for jokes and mockery but when he removes the facade his personality often seems mysterious and grave. Hoid would not consider himself a good man. Hoid is not always serious when he should be, due to how much normal human interaction bores him. Hoid cannot directly physically harm people; this is an involuntary trait that is the result of changes to his spirit made during his time as a Dawnshard. Lunamor says he cannot hurt man because it is forbidden by other gods.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance & Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2d55df7f-9b37-421f-8a78-b1af70cb93a3'}, page_content='Hoid - He also tells a young Shallan Davar, "You needn\'t fear me.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance & Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2d55df7f-9b37-421f-8a78-b1af70cb93a3'}, page_content='Hoid - I\'m terribly ineffective at hurting people. I blame my upbringing." Hoid apologizes to Kelsier after beating him in a fight, stating he doesn\'t have the inclination to do real harm to him. This aversion causes him to be nauseated when thinking about physically harming someone, and is sometimes bad enough to incapacitate him. However, this only extends to physical trauma- Hoid has no issues with mentally hurting someone or through inaction. Hoid also has issues with harming himself physically, such as when he has to manipulate another man into punching him when he wants a tooth knocked out, rather than just doing it himself. If he had the capacity to, he would be willing to kill to achieve his goals, he would also let even those he cares about perish if it meant the furtherance of his goals. Hoid is a very kind person to those he takes a liking to, doing his best to emotionally console them and give them the will to keep going. This can be seen in the various times he has told Kaladin stories in order to comfort him and teach him a lesson that he believes he needs to learn. He has done the same to Shallan, most notably when he met her as a child traumatized by her experiences and the abuses she went through during the Middlefest Fair. Here, he consoles her and gave her motivation to keep moving forward. He did the same later, when speaking with her in Kholinar. He occasionally uses Allomancy to help Soothe people. While he is very comforting to those he likes, and can sometimes be open about some parts of his past; he does make sure that they never come to trust him too much, and that they understand what kind of person he is, and that they understand the dangers involved with getting to close to or trusting him. On the other end, he finds great joy in tormenting those he hates, such as Ruthar, Rayse, or Kelsier. This is likely a large part in his enjoyment of playing the role of court jesters like the King\'s Wit or the Imperial Fool. This behavior of his tends to rub many people the wrong way, making him despised by many people he interacts with. He sometimes bickers even with those he likes, such as Design, though this takes the form of an exasperated fondness rather than bitter mockery. He deeply enjoys storytelling, and has learned many stories over his long life. The stories he tells often have a personal or thematic relevance to those he is telling them to. Though sometimes, he simply tells stories for the sake of telling them, as he feels that as stories exist, they must be told. As a storyteller, he deeply hates when people spoil his stories. He also enjoys pontificating on the nature of art and storytelling to whoever would listen. He also enjoys asking people questions of philosophy and ideology, and would do so even with complete strangers. He uses these questions in order to use the answers of others as a jumping off point to share his own philosophy on the subject in question. He also finds joy in is getting away with things. As a child, he often stared at the stars and wondered about what they were and what it would be like to visit them. For unknown reasons, he was willing to turn down the immense power of a Shard when it was offered to him. He has a very negative outlook on himself, often believing that he has no answers for others or even any answers at all, believes that he should never be trusted due to what he is willing to do to achieve his goals, he thinks himself arrogant and regrets many of his actions and inactions throughout his life, and he does not consider himself a good man. He even considers a Dawnshard itself to have become completely worthless in his wearing of it. His ultimate goal is to "make that which once was," though the exact details are currently unknown. Philosophy \nHe believes that the main thing that people value in creation is not the creation itself, but the novelty, timeliness, and originality of it. Observing that if two people make the same discovery independently, the one who reveals their discovery first is the one given credit and lauded for their innovation, while the second is considered a forger. That if two artists create similar works of comparable pulchritude independent of each other, one would be lauded and the other would be bemoaned as derivative. He claims that if it was truly a matter of the aesthetic beauty of a work, it would not matter which came first. From this, he claims that the idea that what is valued most is creative ability, wisdom, and invention to be nothing more than a lie that humanity tells itself. He admits that it is a rather cynical viewpoint, but holds to it regardless. He feels that art and aesthetic beauty is not some eternal idea outside of humanity, but rather that it inherently relies upon and is defined by humanity. That art produced with low audience expectations can gain much love and loyal following from those given more then they expect; but conversely, an artist held in very high esteem can have their works torn apart and considered a failure for falling even slightly short from expectations. Aesthetic beauty is given definition through audience expectation and interpretation, it relies deeply upon audience participation, and therefore is not eternal and independent. He claims that this aspect of art makes it fundamentally unfair. He furthers this idea to say that the concept of expectation defining value extends to all parts of life, such as in financial gains. He believes that all great art is necessarily hated by some due to the variety in human tastes. To make it so nobody would hate a work of art, one must remove everything that makes it special, therefore making it so that it is loved by nobody. Being hated is not proof that art is great, but not being hated is proof that it is not. He believes that art is about emotion, examination and going places people have never gone before to discover and investigate new things; it is from this definition of art, and his recognition of the subjective nature of aesthetic taste, that he argues that all great art is necessarily hated by somebody. When questioning himself on how many people need to love a work of art to outweigh the hate it inevitably inspires, and balance out the risk. Thus, if even one person loves a work, no matter how many people hate it, it is worthwhile. He believes that stories don\'t live until they are imagined in someone\'s mind, and that everyone\'s experience of the story is individual and unique. He believes that the meaning of a story is up to the audience themselves to decide; that it is not meant to tell them how to think, but instead to give them questions to think upon. He thinks that the interpretations people have of stories are based upon what they themselves are looking for, as are the answers they find in them. His belief in how stories take on life in the minds of an audience is likely a reason for his feeling of obligation to tell the stories that he learns to whoever will listen.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0e802eaf-ff64-44f3-8385-f62813dba214'}, page_content="Hoid -  Appearance \nHoid's appearance varies dramatically from book to book. He's often in disguise, which makes his true appearance difficult to ascertain."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0e802eaf-ff64-44f3-8385-f62813dba214'}, page_content="Hoid - Couple this with the fact that he can Lightweave his appearance in order to look however he wants, it makes it nearly impossible to know for sure what he looks like. To the best of our knowledge, his face is lined, hawk-like and arrow shaped. Hoid is tall and thin and also has a sharp nose and jaw with delicate eyebrows. He tends to cock his head to one side and has keen blue eyes. Hoid's hair is white, though he was not born with that color and he occasionally dyes it. There is a particular reason for his hair being white. When he is on Roshar during the War of Reckoning and True Desolation, serving as King Elhokar Kholin's, and later Queen Jasnah Kholin's Wit, Hoid has the appearance of an Alethi man in his mid-30s with deep onyx hair. He wears a stiff black coat and carries a long thin sword at his waist. This blade is not magically Invested but has personal value to Hoid. It is a symbol of office for the King/Queen's Wit, though Hoid himself is not a skilled swordfighter."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Personality', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b8f441ca-739e-4234-8613-aac459146842'}, page_content="Hoid -  Personality \nHoid's true personality, while also usually disguised, is more easily seen as he occasionally drops whatever part he is playing. One of his overall most noticeable traits is his sharp wit and intelligence. The characters he plays often have a penchant for jokes and mockery but when he removes the facade his personality often seems mysterious and grave. Hoid would not consider himself a good man. Hoid is not always serious when he should be, due to how much normal human interaction bores him. Hoid cannot directly physically harm people; this is an involuntary trait that is the result of changes to his spirit made during his time as a Dawnshard. Lunamor says he cannot hurt man because it is forbidden by other gods."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Personality', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b8f441ca-739e-4234-8613-aac459146842'}, page_content='Hoid - He also tells a young Shallan Davar, "You needn\'t fear me.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Personality', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b8f441ca-739e-4234-8613-aac459146842'}, page_content='Hoid - I\'m terribly ineffective at hurting people. I blame my upbringing." Hoid apologizes to Kelsier after beating him in a fight, stating he doesn\'t have the inclination to do real harm to him. This aversion causes him to be nauseated when thinking about physically harming someone, and is sometimes bad enough to incapacitate him. However, this only extends to physical trauma- Hoid has no issues with mentally hurting someone or through inaction. Hoid also has issues with harming himself physically, such as when he has to manipulate another man into punching him when he wants a tooth knocked out, rather than just doing it himself. If he had the capacity to, he would be willing to kill to achieve his goals, he would also let even those he cares about perish if it meant the furtherance of his goals. Hoid is a very kind person to those he takes a liking to, doing his best to emotionally console them and give them the will to keep going. This can be seen in the various times he has told Kaladin stories in order to comfort him and teach him a lesson that he believes he needs to learn. He has done the same to Shallan, most notably when he met her as a child traumatized by her experiences and the abuses she went through during the Middlefest Fair. Here, he consoles her and gave her motivation to keep moving forward. He did the same later, when speaking with her in Kholinar. He occasionally uses Allomancy to help Soothe people. While he is very comforting to those he likes, and can sometimes be open about some parts of his past; he does make sure that they never come to trust him too much, and that they understand what kind of person he is, and that they understand the dangers involved with getting to close to or trusting him. On the other end, he finds great joy in tormenting those he hates, such as Ruthar, Rayse, or Kelsier. This is likely a large part in his enjoyment of playing the role of court jesters like the King\'s Wit or the Imperial Fool. This behavior of his tends to rub many people the wrong way, making him despised by many people he interacts with. He sometimes bickers even with those he likes, such as Design, though this takes the form of an exasperated fondness rather than bitter mockery. He deeply enjoys storytelling, and has learned many stories over his long life. The stories he tells often have a personal or thematic relevance to those he is telling them to. Though sometimes, he simply tells stories for the sake of telling them, as he feels that as stories exist, they must be told. As a storyteller, he deeply hates when people spoil his stories. He also enjoys pontificating on the nature of art and storytelling to whoever would listen. He also enjoys asking people questions of philosophy and ideology, and would do so even with complete strangers. He uses these questions in order to use the answers of others as a jumping off point to share his own philosophy on the subject in question. He also finds joy in is getting away with things.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Personality', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b8f441ca-739e-4234-8613-aac459146842'}, page_content='Hoid - As a child, he often stared at the stars and wondered about what they were and what it would be like to visit them. For unknown reasons, he was willing to turn down the immense power of a Shard when it was offered to him. He has a very negative outlook on himself, often believing that he has no answers for others or even any answers at all, believes that he should never be trusted due to what he is willing to do to achieve his goals, he thinks himself arrogant and regrets many of his actions and inactions throughout his life, and he does not consider himself a good man. He even considers a Dawnshard itself to have become completely worthless in his wearing of it. His ultimate goal is to "make that which once was," though the exact details are currently unknown. Philosophy \nHe believes that the main thing that people value in creation is not the creation itself, but the novelty, timeliness, and originality of it. Observing that if two people make the same discovery independently, the one who reveals their discovery first is the one given credit and lauded for their innovation, while the second is considered a forger. That if two artists create similar works of comparable pulchritude independent of each other, one would be lauded and the other would be bemoaned as derivative. He claims that if it was truly a matter of the aesthetic beauty of a work, it would not matter which came first. From this, he claims that the idea that what is valued most is creative ability, wisdom, and invention to be nothing more than a lie that humanity tells itself. He admits that it is a rather cynical viewpoint, but holds to it regardless. He feels that art and aesthetic beauty is not some eternal idea outside of humanity, but rather that it inherently relies upon and is defined by humanity. That art produced with low audience expectations can gain much love and loyal following from those given more then they expect; but conversely, an artist held in very high esteem can have their works torn apart and considered a failure for falling even slightly short from expectations. Aesthetic beauty is given definition through audience expectation and interpretation, it relies deeply upon audience participation, and therefore is not eternal and independent. He claims that this aspect of art makes it fundamentally unfair. He furthers this idea to say that the concept of expectation defining value extends to all parts of life, such as in financial gains. He believes that all great art is necessarily hated by some due to the variety in human tastes. To make it so nobody would hate a work of art, one must remove everything that makes it special, therefore making it so that it is loved by nobody. Being hated is not proof that art is great, but not being hated is proof that it is not. He believes that art is about emotion, examination and going places people have never gone before to discover and investigate new things; it is from this definition of art, and his recognition of the subjective nature of aesthetic taste, that he argues that all great art is necessarily hated by somebody. When questioning himself on how many people need to love a work of art to outweigh the hate it inevitably inspires, and balance out the risk. Thus, if even one person loves a work, no matter how many people hate it, it is worthwhile. He believes that stories don\'t live until they are imagined in someone\'s mind, and that everyone\'s experience of the story is individual and unique. He believes that the meaning of a story is up to the audience themselves to decide; that it is not meant to tell them how to think, but instead to give them questions to think upon. He thinks that the interpretations people have of stories are based upon what they themselves are looking for, as are the answers they find in them. His belief in how stories take on life in the minds of an audience is likely a reason for his feeling of obligation to tell the stories that he learns to whoever will listen.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Philosophy', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'aff30e57-e334-4dfb-b909-58031f44c69b'}, page_content='Hoid -  Philosophy \nHe believes that the main thing that people value in creation is not the creation itself, but the novelty, timeliness, and originality of it. Observing that if two people make the same discovery independently, the one who reveals their discovery first is the one given credit and lauded for their innovation, while the second is considered a forger.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Philosophy', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'aff30e57-e334-4dfb-b909-58031f44c69b'}, page_content="Hoid - That if two artists create similar works of comparable pulchritude independent of each other, one would be lauded and the other would be bemoaned as derivative. He claims that if it was truly a matter of the aesthetic beauty of a work, it would not matter which came first. From this, he claims that the idea that what is valued most is creative ability, wisdom, and invention to be nothing more than a lie that humanity tells itself. He admits that it is a rather cynical viewpoint, but holds to it regardless. He feels that art and aesthetic beauty is not some eternal idea outside of humanity, but rather that it inherently relies upon and is defined by humanity. That art produced with low audience expectations can gain much love and loyal following from those given more then they expect; but conversely, an artist held in very high esteem can have their works torn apart and considered a failure for falling even slightly short from expectations. Aesthetic beauty is given definition through audience expectation and interpretation, it relies deeply upon audience participation, and therefore is not eternal and independent. He claims that this aspect of art makes it fundamentally unfair. He furthers this idea to say that the concept of expectation defining value extends to all parts of life, such as in financial gains. He believes that all great art is necessarily hated by some due to the variety in human tastes. To make it so nobody would hate a work of art, one must remove everything that makes it special, therefore making it so that it is loved by nobody. Being hated is not proof that art is great, but not being hated is proof that it is not. He believes that art is about emotion, examination and going places people have never gone before to discover and investigate new things; it is from this definition of art, and his recognition of the subjective nature of aesthetic taste, that he argues that all great art is necessarily hated by somebody. When questioning himself on how many people need to love a work of art to outweigh the hate it inevitably inspires, and balance out the risk. Thus, if even one person loves a work, no matter how many people hate it, it is worthwhile. He believes that stories don't live until they are imagined in someone's mind, and that everyone's experience of the story is individual and unique. He believes that the meaning of a story is up to the audience themselves to decide; that it is not meant to tell them how to think, but instead to give them questions to think upon. He thinks that the interpretations people have of stories are based upon what they themselves are looking for, as are the answers they find in them. His belief in how stories take on life in the minds of an audience is likely a reason for his feeling of obligation to tell the stories that he learns to whoever will listen."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b955e5d5-7e2f-4feb-ae93-191f5e9f15cf'}, page_content="Hoid -  Attributes and Abilities \n\nHoid does not yet have the abilities of every planet he's visited. Some of his powers predate the Shattering, but none of them are gained through Hemalurgy. Hoid is concerned about opening himself up to the influence of Shards, so he only gains access to manifestations of Investiture through more conventional, but more difficult ways. Hoid has access to multiple Invested Arts, but not an incredibly large number. He is likely the most powerful non-Shard entity in the cosmere, although a few of the older dragons and aethers might rival him. After Odium stole some of his memories, Hoid instituted protection protocols to defend himself if something or someone tried to interact with his soul. This causes his body to be frozen in time, while his mind remains unaffected. In this state, he is still able to make Connections with others, and may even see and hear from those he is Connected with. The physical stasis was not what Hoid intended to happen and it will last until the person stops trying to interact with his soul. There are only a few things in the cosmere that are capable of hurting him, one of which is likely Nightblood, and he stays far away from all of them. Hoid also has an unknown seon. Illusions \n\nHoid has access to an Invested Art known as Lightweaving that originates from Yolen prior to the Shattering of Adonalsium. Lightweaving allows for the creation of optical and auditory illusions. This Lightweaving is much less restrictive than the later Rosharan variant, and does not require a spren or Stormlight to function. Hoid sometimes makes use of this ability in his disguises although he has several ways of changing how he looks including practical effects. He may also make use of it in some of his storytelling, such as the pictures of Derethil and the Wandersail that Kaladin sees in the smoke when Hoid is telling him a story. Hoid's Yolish Lightweaving does not always seem to function perfectly on Roshar; in fact, he needs help from Shallan to fully craft an illusion. His power is somehow limited, and he has trouble making some aspects of it work, even after multiple attempts. It is uncertain why this occurs and whether or not this issue is unique to Roshar. Hoid's bonding of a Cryptic will provide abilities that supplement his own Lightweaving and allows him to overcome his issues crafting illusions, although further impacts or resonances between the two are unknown. Hoid's access to Yolish Lightweaving does allow him to guide another Lightweaver's power, although this is not something he would be able to do with just any Invested Art. Worldhopping \nHoid travels between various planets within the cosmere by making use of perpendicularities, places usually created by the presence of a Shard on a planet where the sheer power of Investiture causes the borders between the realms to be weakened. A knowledgeable person such as Hoid is able to transition from the Physical Realm to the Cognitive Realm. Hoid can then travel to a different world's subastral, as the distances between worlds in the Cognitive Realm are much smaller than in the Physical Realm. Hoid is very proficient at traveling in the Cognitive Realm. He can easily travel to any world that has an active perpendicularity, even those worlds where the perpendicularities are dangerous to pass through such as the Well of Ascension. Hoid is known to be aware of perpendicularities on Scadrial, Sel, and Roshar, and likely knows of Nalthis's perpendicularity as well. While Hoid typically makes use of natural perpendicularities in his travels, later in life he may also have access to an ability that essentially allows him to generate his own personal perpendicularity, much like the Surge of Transportation. Following the invention of space travel, he also makes use of spaceships to travel between planets. Dawnshard \n\nHoid held the Dawnshard with an intent diametrically opposed to the concepts of harm and violence for a long period of time."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b955e5d5-7e2f-4feb-ae93-191f5e9f15cf'}, page_content='Hoid - His time holding it caused changes to his spiritweb in a similar manner to savantism. These changes meant that long-term, Hoid found himself unable to inflict harm on himself or any others, as well as unable to eat meat he believes was naturally produced (i.e., he could eat meat he believes was made in a lab or by magic). His Dawnshard is in some way connected to the First Gem, his eponymous topaz. There were other side effects of the Dawnshard. Hoid held it for so long that not only is he ageless, it has become essentially impossible for him to die. While other people who have held this Dawnshard have gained the ability to Skip and teleport from planet to planet, Hoid has not for most of his life had access to this ability, and it is uncertain if he ever gained it. Time-Dilation \nIn addition to his agelessness, Hoid has not actually experienced all those years, instead making use of some time-dilation technique that may render him somehow unconscious or unaware. However, Hoid does not have the ability to travel backwards in time. Healing Factor \n\nHoid has access to some sort of healing factor that is capable of repairing both the body and the soul. He is able to regenerate any damaged body parts at will, including his head. He can also heal from being stabbed hemalurgically. Hoid is able to repress his healing factor in some way, preventing instantaneous healing, an ability that he makes use of in some of his disguises. This healing factor makes it very difficult to kill Hoid, although he is still at least somewhat vulnerable. The name of the manifestation of Investiture responsible for Hoid\'s healing is unknown, but it is ancient, likely originating from some Pre-Shattering source. It is uncertain whether or not this healing factor is at all related to Hoid\'s apparent agelessness, which is known to originate from a remnant of a weapon built to kill Adonalsium. Hoid is unafraid of Shardblades for multiple reasons, probably including his healing factor. Fortune \n\nHoid has access to an ability that allows him to make use of the Spiritual attribute of Fortune, which grants him a limited amount of foresight. Hoid\'s Fortune ability gives him an innate knowledge of where and when he needs to be. While this ability may grant him knowledge of what he is to do, usually Hoid does not know why his ability has brought him to a specific place. Hoid\'s Fortune ability is not infallible; occasionally it directs him to go somewhere, but either nothing notable is happening or he is unable to discover the reason why he has been led there. Hoid\'s fortune ability has let him know about instant noodles, although he has had prior experience with them on Taldain. Connection \nHoid has access to some manifestation of Investiture that allows him to manipulate the Spiritual attribute of Connection. The full extent of this ability is unknown, but its primary known use is to help Hoid speak the various languages of the worlds of the cosmere that he visits. The ability allows him to Connect to whatever land he is in, temporarily altering his Spiritual aspect to believe that he was raised in that place, allowing him to speak as a native. While Hoid has learned naturally how to speak some foreign languages, and is decent with languages, he desires to pass as a local oftentimes, which requires something beyond natural learning. Generally he makes use of his Connection ability to communicate in foreign languages. This ability is not without fault though, as when Hoid speaks naturally it will fill in local idioms and phrases on its own, but if Hoid is careless and focuses on a specific word or phrase the ability may fail and he will say the word verbatim in his own tongue or it may be said in an odd way. Hoid is an expert in using his Connection ability, but even he sometimes makes mistakes. This is the reason he occasionally slips up and may say words that confuse others, such as "coin" and "bunny" on Roshar. As Hoid has demonstrated the ability to fluently speak foreign languages before the knowledge of unsealed metalminds became widespread, it is unlikely that he is making use of Feruchemical duralumin to manipulate Connection. Visions \nHoid, via unknown means, is able to enter and exit certain visions, as well as bring those he is bonded with, like Design.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b955e5d5-7e2f-4feb-ae93-191f5e9f15cf'}, page_content='Hoid - While doing so, he creates a large, pure white bubble of light, which can shelter those who have been brought into the vision naturally. While in the vision, Hoid is able to create whatever objects he wants. Hoid is only able to do this for roughly twenty minutes before being detected. Metallic Arts \nHoid has also gained access to Allomancy, by burning a bead of lerasium stolen from the Well of Ascension. This grants him power equivalent to that of the ancient Allomancers.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b955e5d5-7e2f-4feb-ae93-191f5e9f15cf'}, page_content='Hoid - It is uncertain how practiced he is with these powers, but he does make use of emotional Allomancy on at least one occasion.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b955e5d5-7e2f-4feb-ae93-191f5e9f15cf'}, page_content="Hoid - He also has access to atium. It is unknown whether or not Hoid has access to Feruchemy. However, he does have access to some unkeyed metalminds, which would not be useful to him without Feruchemical abilities or unsealed metalminds. The particular attributes that are stored in these metalminds are unknown. Hoid does not make use of Hemalurgy, to gain access to the Metallic Arts or any other manifestation of Investiture, as he is concerned about opening himself up to the influence of Shards. He does, however, own many Hemalurgic spikes. Awakening \n\nAs a Yolish man, Hoid was not himself born with any BioChromatic Breath. However at some point Hoid has gained access to enough BioChromatic Breath to bring him to at least the Second Heightening. This means Hoid has at least two hundred Breaths, which grant him the ability to recognize unsupressed Breath auras and judge about how much breath another Awakener has, as well as perfect pitch. That is not to say that Hoid may not have reached a higher Heightening, just that the second Heightening is his minimum power level. Hoid's level of skill with Awakening is still unknown, as he has only made use of it on one known occasion, when he Awakened a doll, causing it to walk. This makes it difficult to ascertain his knowledge of Commands or complex Awakenings. Hoid's level of control over Investiture does allow him to suppress his Breath aura, making it difficult to be noticed by others. However, there are various methods of detecting Investiture that could circumvent this suppression. Hoid's perfect pitch does aid him in tuning instruments and making music. Additionally, holding Breath has allowed Hoid to outsource centuries of his memories to said Breath. After Odium's destruction of some of these Breaths in order to wipe his short-term memory, his level of Breath was reduced to just under the Second Heightening, resulting in a loss of perfect pitch. Surgebinder \n\nHoid has bonded the Cryptic Design, which grants him access to Surgebinding. While the enhanced reflexes and healing permitted by Stormlight will likely be less useful to Hoid, the Nahel bond allows him to access the surges of Illumination and Transformation. This allows Hoid to Soulcast, transforming one type of matter to another by persuading its Cognitive aspect as well as Lightweaving, which grants him the ability to create visual and auditory illusions. This Rosharan Lightweaving seems to have a compounding effect with his Yolish Lightweaving, and allows him to circumvent the problems that he has experienced with his own illusions. Although Hoid's Ideals are unknown, he has admitted some truths. This may eventually grant him a Shardblade and Shardplate, and he likely has access to at least a Shardblade from their bond. Out of all of the orders of the Knights Radiant, Lightweaver was his first choice, as Lightweaving matches him very well and he's quite familiar and experienced with it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b955e5d5-7e2f-4feb-ae93-191f5e9f15cf'}, page_content='Hoid - Having full access to Lightweaving is a fulfillment of a long, long quest for him. Elantrian \n\nHoid became an Elantrian through winning a bet he made with Riina, a member of The Ire. Despite his short time with the power, Hoid showed a notable aptitude for the manipulation of Aons, being able to edit a complex AonDor "curse" placed on Charlie by Riina, who herself is a highly experienced wielder of AonDor. Additionally, Hoid was shown to have spent significant time coveting this specific Invested art. His knowledge of AonDor is strong enough that he is able to hack the system in order to use it off of Sel. Storytelling Method \n\nHoid tells stories with smoke and sand. Sand \nOn Nalthis, Lightsong calls Hoid to tell the story of Hallandren history to him and Siri. As he told the story, he dropped sands, dusts, and small objects, mixing them together to produce various effects.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b955e5d5-7e2f-4feb-ae93-191f5e9f15cf'}, page_content='Hoid - He began by trailing sand out of his hand, then he added a powdery black sand, when both trails mixed it became a white sand. He began to scatter fern leaves and then threw the handful up with blue and deep red dust making it seem like a minor explosion. He sprinkled silver glitter in front of him, then trailed powdery brown dirt. Black dust, and then flower petals. He then sent out a spray of half a dozen colors from both hands. Then bright yellow dust from one hand and black from the other. Torn writing on paper, followed by metal bits, black charcoal dust from both hands, he crumbled clay, sprinkled golden dust around, bits of grass and earth, a white powder and then a spray of water that turned into mist. Smoke \nWhile telling stories with smoke he uses a flute, blowing the smoke, it may be Yolish Lightweaving that causes patterns and images to appear in smoke. On Roshar, the chasms echoed the music allowing him to speak and play, without the music ever seeming to stop. It is unclear how the flute could be used without chasms or canyons. '), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Illusions', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '30935a47-e023-4eb4-84b6-2504f9619b96'}, page_content="Hoid -  Illusions \n\nHoid has access to an Invested Art known as Lightweaving that originates from Yolen prior to the Shattering of Adonalsium. Lightweaving allows for the creation of optical and auditory illusions. This Lightweaving is much less restrictive than the later Rosharan variant, and does not require a spren or Stormlight to function. Hoid sometimes makes use of this ability in his disguises although he has several ways of changing how he looks including practical effects. He may also make use of it in some of his storytelling, such as the pictures of Derethil and the Wandersail that Kaladin sees in the smoke when Hoid is telling him a story. Hoid's Yolish Lightweaving does not always seem to function perfectly on Roshar; in fact, he needs help from Shallan to fully craft an illusion. His power is somehow limited, and he has trouble making some aspects of it work, even after multiple attempts. It is uncertain why this occurs and whether or not this issue is unique to Roshar. Hoid's bonding of a Cryptic will provide abilities that supplement his own Lightweaving and allows him to overcome his issues crafting illusions, although further impacts or resonances between the two are unknown."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Illusions', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '30935a47-e023-4eb4-84b6-2504f9619b96'}, page_content="Hoid - Hoid's access to Yolish Lightweaving does allow him to guide another Lightweaver's power, although this is not something he would be able to do with just any Invested Art."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldhopping', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3031413f-97ab-4c6b-9c82-2558ec52ac89'}, page_content='Hoid -  Worldhopping \nHoid travels between various planets within the cosmere by making use of perpendicularities, places usually created by the presence of a Shard on a planet where the sheer power of Investiture causes the borders between the realms to be weakened. A knowledgeable person such as Hoid is able to transition from the Physical Realm to the Cognitive Realm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldhopping', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3031413f-97ab-4c6b-9c82-2558ec52ac89'}, page_content="Hoid - Hoid can then travel to a different world's subastral, as the distances between worlds in the Cognitive Realm are much smaller than in the Physical Realm. Hoid is very proficient at traveling in the Cognitive Realm. He can easily travel to any world that has an active perpendicularity, even those worlds where the perpendicularities are dangerous to pass through such as the Well of Ascension. Hoid is known to be aware of perpendicularities on Scadrial, Sel, and Roshar, and likely knows of Nalthis's perpendicularity as well. While Hoid typically makes use of natural perpendicularities in his travels, later in life he may also have access to an ability that essentially allows him to generate his own personal perpendicularity, much like the Surge of Transportation. Following the invention of space travel, he also makes use of spaceships to travel between planets."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Dawnshard', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f03991ed-e3fc-4c6a-b052-5f99cc22cda6'}, page_content='Hoid -  Dawnshard \n\nHoid held the Dawnshard with an intent diametrically opposed to the concepts of harm and violence for a long period of time. His time holding it caused changes to his spiritweb in a similar manner to savantism.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Dawnshard', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f03991ed-e3fc-4c6a-b052-5f99cc22cda6'}, page_content='Hoid - These changes meant that long-term, Hoid found himself unable to inflict harm on himself or any others, as well as unable to eat meat he believes was naturally produced (i.e., he could eat meat he believes was made in a lab or by magic). His Dawnshard is in some way connected to the First Gem, his eponymous topaz. There were other side effects of the Dawnshard. Hoid held it for so long that not only is he ageless, it has become essentially impossible for him to die. While other people who have held this Dawnshard have gained the ability to Skip and teleport from planet to planet, Hoid has not for most of his life had access to this ability, and it is uncertain if he ever gained it. Time-Dilation \nIn addition to his agelessness, Hoid has not actually experienced all those years, instead making use of some time-dilation technique that may render him somehow unconscious or unaware. However, Hoid does not have the ability to travel backwards in time.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Time-Dilation', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'a3952204-f7ea-42bf-ae62-3b6eaf1cb043'}, page_content='Hoid -  Time-Dilation \nIn addition to his agelessness, Hoid has not actually experienced all those years, instead making use of some time-dilation technique that may render him somehow unconscious or unaware. However, Hoid does not have the ability to travel backwards in time.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Healing Factor', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b9986dcf-5c57-4ae9-b6f5-ece638fa3f98'}, page_content='Hoid -  Healing Factor \n\nHoid has access to some sort of healing factor that is capable of repairing both the body and the soul. He is able to regenerate any damaged body parts at will, including his head. He can also heal from being stabbed hemalurgically. Hoid is able to repress his healing factor in some way, preventing instantaneous healing, an ability that he makes use of in some of his disguises. This healing factor makes it very difficult to kill Hoid, although he is still at least somewhat vulnerable.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Healing Factor', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b9986dcf-5c57-4ae9-b6f5-ece638fa3f98'}, page_content="Hoid - The name of the manifestation of Investiture responsible for Hoid's healing is unknown, but it is ancient, likely originating from some Pre-Shattering source. It is uncertain whether or not this healing factor is at all related to Hoid's apparent agelessness, which is known to originate from a remnant of a weapon built to kill Adonalsium. Hoid is unafraid of Shardblades for multiple reasons, probably including his healing factor."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Fortune', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fa448da4-c0bd-4fb8-ad0c-fbd7da48e73c'}, page_content="Hoid -  Fortune \n\nHoid has access to an ability that allows him to make use of the Spiritual attribute of Fortune, which grants him a limited amount of foresight. Hoid's Fortune ability gives him an innate knowledge of where and when he needs to be."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Fortune', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fa448da4-c0bd-4fb8-ad0c-fbd7da48e73c'}, page_content="Hoid - While this ability may grant him knowledge of what he is to do, usually Hoid does not know why his ability has brought him to a specific place. Hoid's Fortune ability is not infallible; occasionally it directs him to go somewhere, but either nothing notable is happening or he is unable to discover the reason why he has been led there. Hoid's fortune ability has let him know about instant noodles, although he has had prior experience with them on Taldain."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Connection', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '25ee43bb-beac-4b52-a766-b6accf6d5009'}, page_content='Hoid -  Connection \nHoid has access to some manifestation of Investiture that allows him to manipulate the Spiritual attribute of Connection. The full extent of this ability is unknown, but its primary known use is to help Hoid speak the various languages of the worlds of the cosmere that he visits. The ability allows him to Connect to whatever land he is in, temporarily altering his Spiritual aspect to believe that he was raised in that place, allowing him to speak as a native. While Hoid has learned naturally how to speak some foreign languages, and is decent with languages, he desires to pass as a local oftentimes, which requires something beyond natural learning. Generally he makes use of his Connection ability to communicate in foreign languages. This ability is not without fault though, as when Hoid speaks naturally it will fill in local idioms and phrases on its own, but if Hoid is careless and focuses on a specific word or phrase the ability may fail and he will say the word verbatim in his own tongue or it may be said in an odd way. Hoid is an expert in using his Connection ability, but even he sometimes makes mistakes. This is the reason he occasionally slips up and may say words that confuse others, such as "coin" and "bunny" on Roshar. As Hoid has demonstrated the ability to fluently speak foreign languages before the knowledge of unsealed metalminds became widespread, it is unlikely that he is making use of Feruchemical duralumin to manipulate Connection. Visions \nHoid, via unknown means, is able to enter and exit certain visions, as well as bring those he is bonded with, like Design.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Connection', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '25ee43bb-beac-4b52-a766-b6accf6d5009'}, page_content='Hoid - While doing so, he creates a large, pure white bubble of light, which can shelter those who have been brought into the vision naturally. While in the vision, Hoid is able to create whatever objects he wants. Hoid is only able to do this for roughly twenty minutes before being detected.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Visions', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2fc05af4-04dd-46c0-8913-3059ac6a8415'}, page_content='Hoid -  Visions \nHoid, via unknown means, is able to enter and exit certain visions, as well as bring those he is bonded with, like Design. While doing so, he creates a large, pure white bubble of light, which can shelter those who have been brought into the vision naturally.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Visions', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2fc05af4-04dd-46c0-8913-3059ac6a8415'}, page_content='Hoid - While in the vision, Hoid is able to create whatever objects he wants. Hoid is only able to do this for roughly twenty minutes before being detected.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Metallic Arts', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fabd7928-1e87-4eb5-a7af-be985f4feae6'}, page_content='Hoid -  Metallic Arts \nHoid has also gained access to Allomancy, by burning a bead of lerasium stolen from the Well of Ascension. This grants him power equivalent to that of the ancient Allomancers. It is uncertain how practiced he is with these powers, but he does make use of emotional Allomancy on at least one occasion.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Metallic Arts', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fabd7928-1e87-4eb5-a7af-be985f4feae6'}, page_content='Hoid - He also has access to atium. It is unknown whether or not Hoid has access to Feruchemy. However, he does have access to some unkeyed metalminds, which would not be useful to him without Feruchemical abilities or unsealed metalminds. The particular attributes that are stored in these metalminds are unknown. Hoid does not make use of Hemalurgy, to gain access to the Metallic Arts or any other manifestation of Investiture, as he is concerned about opening himself up to the influence of Shards. He does, however, own many Hemalurgic spikes.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Awakening', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f1504447-b6cc-4464-9b2f-603a75991630'}, page_content="Hoid -  Awakening \n\nAs a Yolish man, Hoid was not himself born with any BioChromatic Breath. However at some point Hoid has gained access to enough BioChromatic Breath to bring him to at least the Second Heightening. This means Hoid has at least two hundred Breaths, which grant him the ability to recognize unsupressed Breath auras and judge about how much breath another Awakener has, as well as perfect pitch. That is not to say that Hoid may not have reached a higher Heightening, just that the second Heightening is his minimum power level. Hoid's level of skill with Awakening is still unknown, as he has only made use of it on one known occasion, when he Awakened a doll, causing it to walk."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Awakening', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f1504447-b6cc-4464-9b2f-603a75991630'}, page_content="Hoid - This makes it difficult to ascertain his knowledge of Commands or complex Awakenings. Hoid's level of control over Investiture does allow him to suppress his Breath aura, making it difficult to be noticed by others. However, there are various methods of detecting Investiture that could circumvent this suppression. Hoid's perfect pitch does aid him in tuning instruments and making music. Additionally, holding Breath has allowed Hoid to outsource centuries of his memories to said Breath. After Odium's destruction of some of these Breaths in order to wipe his short-term memory, his level of Breath was reduced to just under the Second Heightening, resulting in a loss of perfect pitch."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgebinder', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5e435ebc-6872-426a-b67b-7955a641b81b'}, page_content="Hoid -  Surgebinder \n\nHoid has bonded the Cryptic Design, which grants him access to Surgebinding. While the enhanced reflexes and healing permitted by Stormlight will likely be less useful to Hoid, the Nahel bond allows him to access the surges of Illumination and Transformation. This allows Hoid to Soulcast, transforming one type of matter to another by persuading its Cognitive aspect as well as Lightweaving, which grants him the ability to create visual and auditory illusions. This Rosharan Lightweaving seems to have a compounding effect with his Yolish Lightweaving, and allows him to circumvent the problems that he has experienced with his own illusions. Although Hoid's Ideals are unknown, he has admitted some truths. This may eventually grant him a Shardblade and Shardplate, and he likely has access to at least a Shardblade from their bond."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Surgebinder', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5e435ebc-6872-426a-b67b-7955a641b81b'}, page_content="Hoid - Out of all of the orders of the Knights Radiant, Lightweaver was his first choice, as Lightweaving matches him very well and he's quite familiar and experienced with it. Having full access to Lightweaving is a fulfillment of a long, long quest for him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Elantrian', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '41ecb5d1-5e9c-49af-b4da-6747d1f755fc'}, page_content='Hoid -  Elantrian \n\nHoid became an Elantrian through winning a bet he made with Riina, a member of The Ire. Despite his short time with the power, Hoid showed a notable aptitude for the manipulation of Aons, being able to edit a complex AonDor "curse" placed on Charlie by Riina, who herself is a highly experienced wielder of AonDor.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Elantrian', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '41ecb5d1-5e9c-49af-b4da-6747d1f755fc'}, page_content='Hoid - Additionally, Hoid was shown to have spent significant time coveting this specific Invested art. His knowledge of AonDor is strong enough that he is able to hack the system in order to use it off of Sel.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Storytelling Method', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e886f442-a563-4b4a-a01e-39c21a2cca41'}, page_content='Hoid -  Storytelling Method \n\nHoid tells stories with smoke and sand. Sand \nOn Nalthis, Lightsong calls Hoid to tell the story of Hallandren history to him and Siri. As he told the story, he dropped sands, dusts, and small objects, mixing them together to produce various effects.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Storytelling Method', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e886f442-a563-4b4a-a01e-39c21a2cca41'}, page_content='Hoid - He began by trailing sand out of his hand, then he added a powdery black sand, when both trails mixed it became a white sand. He began to scatter fern leaves and then threw the handful up with blue and deep red dust making it seem like a minor explosion. He sprinkled silver glitter in front of him, then trailed powdery brown dirt. Black dust, and then flower petals. He then sent out a spray of half a dozen colors from both hands. Then bright yellow dust from one hand and black from the other. Torn writing on paper, followed by metal bits, black charcoal dust from both hands, he crumbled clay, sprinkled golden dust around, bits of grass and earth, a white powder and then a spray of water that turned into mist. Smoke \nWhile telling stories with smoke he uses a flute, blowing the smoke, it may be Yolish Lightweaving that causes patterns and images to appear in smoke. On Roshar, the chasms echoed the music allowing him to speak and play, without the music ever seeming to stop. It is unclear how the flute could be used without chasms or canyons. '), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sand', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e487a0e6-c884-4ced-9050-8cadb92b17eb'}, page_content='Hoid -  Sand \nOn Nalthis, Lightsong calls Hoid to tell the story of Hallandren history to him and Siri. As he told the story, he dropped sands, dusts, and small objects, mixing them together to produce various effects.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sand', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e487a0e6-c884-4ced-9050-8cadb92b17eb'}, page_content='Hoid - He began by trailing sand out of his hand, then he added a powdery black sand, when both trails mixed it became a white sand. He began to scatter fern leaves and then threw the handful up with blue and deep red dust making it seem like a minor explosion. He sprinkled silver glitter in front of him, then trailed powdery brown dirt. Black dust, and then flower petals. He then sent out a spray of half a dozen colors from both hands. Then bright yellow dust from one hand and black from the other. Torn writing on paper, followed by metal bits, black charcoal dust from both hands, he crumbled clay, sprinkled golden dust around, bits of grass and earth, a white powder and then a spray of water that turned into mist.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Smoke', 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9f1ddaa9-91ae-45d1-98f7-eaac200ab394'}, page_content='Hoid -  Smoke \nWhile telling stories with smoke he uses a flute, blowing the smoke, it may be Yolish Lightweaving that causes patterns and images to appear in smoke. On Roshar, the chasms echoed the music allowing him to speak and play, without the music ever seeming to stop.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Smoke', 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9f1ddaa9-91ae-45d1-98f7-eaac200ab394'}, page_content='Hoid - It is unclear how the flute could be used without chasms or canyons. '), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content='Hoid -  History \n Origins \n\nThe individual who would later become known as Hoid was born on Yolen sometime prior to the Shattering of Adonalsium. He was born naturally and his parents were married. From an early age he developed a fascination with the topic of whether life existed on other planets and often listened to local philosophers debate the topic. During this period before the Shattering, Hoid learned Yolish Lightweaving, which sometimes got him into trouble. Some of his oldest aliases, one of which likely came from a former master of his, also date back to this period; among these are Hoid, which he says he stole from someone he should have loved, and Cepandrius Maxtori. Eventually, Hoid met the dragon Frost, who is his elder by a small amount, though Hoid may have already started aging strangely by that time. Shortly thereafter, Hoid also met the people who would become the sixteen original Vessels. His early relationships with the future Vessels seem to have been amicable; he went out for drinks with Tanavast at least once, considered Ati to be a kind and generous man, and became friends with Rayse. At some point, for a variety of reasons, the future Vessels resolved to kill Adonalsium; Hoid considered doing so to be somewhat necessary and was only loosely involved in their plan, though he was present for the actual Shattering. At the Shattering, he was offered one of the newly-created Shards, which he refused; even millennia later, he regards this as having been a wise decision because it allows him a greater degree of freedom.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content="Hoid - In his conversations with the new Vessels, he implied that his rejection of a Shard meant he would not interfere with their affairs, though given his interest in being able to do as he pleased it seems unlikely he actually intended to leave them alone. The Shattering appears to have been a turning point in his relationships with many of the Vessels, as he seems to look down on them for being so eager to Ascend, while Edgli at least looks down on him continuing to involve himself in the affairs of the cosmere after refusing a Shard; additionally, the Shattering may be the origin of his grudge against Rayse and Bavadin. At some point early in the history of the cosmere, Hoid held a Dawnshard; this Dawnshard appears to have been associated with a piece of topaz. Hoid apparently attempted to do something more with the gemstone for a long time, but ultimately was forced to admit that it had become worthless because he wore it. His  association with this gem earned him the name Topaz and the title Bearer of the First Gem. Holding a Dawnshard also permanently altered Hoid's spiritweb; among other things, these alterations make him unable to harm others or consume meat, allow him to heal from nearly any injury, and are likely the cause of his immortality. Hoid's involvement in important events early in the history of the cosmere has had significant effects on his relationship to Investiture. The fact that he comes from before the Shattering, when magic worked much differently, makes Investiture sometimes act oddly with regard to him; the Shattering also appears to have changed magic such that his Yolish Lightweaving is no longer fully functional. Additionally, his connection to certain events involving the Dawnshards makes some uses of Investiture particularly dangerous for him. The Desolations \nAt some point after the Shattering, Hoid visited Roshar and mingled with the original inhabitants of the world, even dancing with the ancient singers. He grew to be close with one singer known as Vatwha."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content='Hoid - He knew the Heralds, and they recognize him by the name Midius. He was the one that taught them how they could use Investiture to enhance their memories.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content="Hoid - Whether he knew them before or after the Oathpact, or the exact nature of their relationship, is unclear. Hoid came to be worshipped by the Unkalaki as Lunu'anaki, the god of travel and mischief who cannot hurt man. Hoid founded the Worldsingers, and has the rank of Master Worldsinger, and at some point in the early Sixth Epoch, he took Senne Khald as his apprentice, and assigned her with the task of writing a treatise on all the Radiant Orders. He has been to Aimia at some point. Hoid attempted to bond a Nahel spren at some point before the Recreance, possibly during a Desolation, but presumably failed. Crisis in the Diem \nHoid traveled to Taldain, though for what reasons are unknown. He was there when the Taishin were deciding whether or not to disband the Diem. Hoid later got onto the boat Khriss took to return to Darkside, where he sang a song to the passengers about the meaning of art. The Restoration of Elantris and Theft of the Moon Scepter \n\nHoid traveled to Sel, likely making use of Devotion's Perpendicularity in Arelon. Hoid spoke to the skaze, and seems to have made some sort of agreement with them hinging on his desire to become an Elantrian with the restoration of Elantris. Hoid disguised himself as a beggar, wrapped in bandages. He helped Sarene smuggle weapons into Elantris. Following the restoration of the city by Raoden, Hoid traveled to the Pool to meet a skaze. He removed his bandages, hoping to find himself transformed into an Elantrian, but the transformation had not occurred. The skaze ridiculed Hoid for his failure, but Hoid expressed his joy that secrets still remained unknown to him and then entered the Perpendicularity and transitioned to the Cognitive Realm. Hoid returned to Sel several years later, and found himself a position in the court of Emperor Ashravan in the Rose Empire as the Royal Fool. He allied himself with the Forger Shai in her attempt to steal the Moon Scepter, an artifact that allows for the translation of the various symbols of Selish Investiture. He arranged for her to be caught after she'd left the Gallery with the Scepter, later using her duplicate to steal the scepter for himself. Hoid stole the Moon Scepter in order to help him translate between various symbols and gain access to the magics on Sel. At some point, he and Shai ran into each other once again, after Shai devoted herself towards finding him again to take her revenge. The Collapse of the Final Empire and Catacendre \nHoid arrived on Scadrial, likely through Ruin's perpendicularity in the Pits of Hathsin. He took up the guise of an informant, pretending to have bad eyesight in order to make himself less threatening to people seeking information from him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content='Hoid - At some point he became known to both Dockson and Ashweather Cett. Kelsier, pretending to be a nobleman, contacted Hoid in , requesting information on House Renoux. Hoid (closed shop, smoking tobacco) met with Kelsier on the streets of Luthadel and told him that House Renoux was buying large amounts of weapons and armor from various noble houses and that Lord Renoux was considering a marriage between Valette and Elend Venture. He also claimed that Renoux was rumored to have some sort of leverage on Venture and that he knew Shan Elariel to be a Soother. At some point following this, he left Scadrial to attend to other business, again likely via the Pits. Around a year later, in , Hoid returned to Scadrial, traveling through Scadrial\'s subastral, riding on the back of a Cognitive Shadow to the Well of Ascension, Preservation\'s Perpendicularity. He was using an oar coated with a strange glowing substance connected to the substance drunk by members of the Ire. He encountered the Shadow of Kelsier, who asked for help returning to the Physical Realm. Hoid told him that there was nothing to be done, but he challenged Kelsier to an insult battle, with the prize being the true answer to one question. Kelsier instead threatened Hoid. Hoid attempted to enter the pool, but Kelsier attacked him. Hoid easily overpowered Kelsier and caused him serious pain, but not permanent injury. Hoid then transitioned through the Well and stole a bead of lerasium from the adjacent room. He later consumed the lerasium and became a Mistborn. When Kelsier spoke of the incident to Preservation, Preservation spoke briefly on Hoid, calling him Cephandrius. Later, Kelsier told Khriss and Nazh about his meeting with Hoid, and they seemed distressed to know that he had arrived and stolen a bead of lerasium. Hoid then traveled to the Terris Dominance to figure out Feruchemy, and then became wrapped up in matters he did not anticipate. This may refer to him becoming involved after the Inquisitor attack on Tathingdwen and the slaughter of the Synod. Hoid took up the guise of a Terris leader and led the Terris refugees to the Central Dominance. A year later, in , Hoid was in Fadrex City, again acting as an informant, and Ashweather Cett suggested Vin speak to him. Just before Vin arrived, Kelsier\'s Cognitive Shadow noticed Hoid from within the Cognitive Realm. Kelsier tried to touch Hoid\'s soul, but was rebuffed by a shock that numbed his hand. At that moment, Vin arrived intending to meet with Hoid, but Kelsier attempted to warn her away. Since he was in the Cognitive Realm, he couldn\'t communicate with her directly, but she did sense that something was off about Hoid and instead chose not to speak to him. He has travelled to Scadrial several times between the Catacendre and the True Desolation, but actively hid from Harmony. During these visits he accomplished much, but what exactly he was doing is currently unknown. The Pahn Kahl Rebellion \nSeveral centuries later, around Hallandren year 327, Hoid traveled to Nalthis and took the role of a master storyteller. Lightsong summoned him to the Court of the Gods, where he recounted the story of Vo, explained the origin of the Hallandren God Kings, and answered Lightsong and Siri\'s questions. He likely achieved perfect pitch while on this world by obtaining additional Breaths. At some later point, Vivenna also met Hoid; she later described him as one of the only people on Nalthis that is cosmere-aware. Hoid spent a lot of time gambling on Nalthis, and was fairly renowned. He would arrange things so that he could never lose, and then bet everything on himself. However, someone else managed to arrange it so that he couldn\'t win, either, resulting in a tie and the loss of his winnings. Vasher once met Hoid when he was using the alias "Dust", several years before Vasher\'s activities on Roshar. Obrodai \nHoid visited Obrodai at some point prior to the True Desolation. A female avatar was created by Autonomy and instilled with a great dislike of Hoid in order to prevent him from returning there. Prelude to the True Desolation \n\nAccording to Cord, when her grandmother served as watcher of the pool, Hoid warned the Unkalaki about the Gods Who Sleep Not. Rock also described an encounter with him in the Horneater Oceans. In a departure from his modus operandi, Hoid played a more conspicuous role in the events on Roshar, as his goal was to become a Radiant. He has been to Threnody at some point before this visit to Roshar. At some point, Sigzil became his apprentice. As master and apprentice, they traveled all across Roshar, including to Babatharnam. He had to pay to have Sigzil freed from prison on three separate occasions. This relationship essentially ended after Sigzil attempted (and failed) to kill somebody and wound up punished via being made into a slave and bridgeman. In  during the Middlefest Fair in Jah Keved, Shallan Davar met Hoid disguised as a messenger, and he spoke with her. Seeing that she was emotionally distressed, he used emotional Allomancy in order to soothe her, and encouraged her to keep on pushing forward despite her struggles. This meeting would leave a deep impression upon Shallan, and she would remember him for years after the event. He met Lift at some point after her blessing by the Nightwatcher in , but before her heist on the Bronze Palace in .'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content='Hoid - She was fond of him, and they parted ways when he jumped into the mouth of a greatshell. Ishikk was hired by three men from the Seventeenth Shard to search for Hoid in the Purelake, though all four failed to find him. He searched for five months, though came up with no results. The War of Reckoning \nOnly a few months before the greatshell hunt on , he became the King\'s Wit, Elhokar Kholin\'s court jester. As the king lived at the Shattered Plains in order to better lead his people during the War of Reckoning, Wit spent most of his time at the plains. He was aware of Sigzil being held in slavery at the plains, but still avoided interacting with him, though not necessarily out of a lack of care. Through his role as Wit, he kept his eyes upon and influenced Dalinar Kholin, going so far as to ask him if he has ever heard the term "Adonalsium", as he believed that he was involved in secret societies such as the Sons of Honor, and thought that Gavilar Kholin confided in him; his suspicions were proven wrong.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content="Hoid - He also told Kaladin the story of Derethil and the Wandersail on . During the course of the story, Hoid uses a special, ancient flute called a Trailman's flute. It is also likely that he used his Yolish Lightweaving to cause the smoke from the fire to take the form of various elements from his story. He told the story in order to teach Kaladin to take responsibility. As he sent him off, he gave him his Trailman's flute, and asked him to take care of Sigzil. Hoid was in Kholinar when Taln arrived to herald the coming of the Desolation on . Before his arrival, he was discussing with a few guards the nature of creativity, invention, and wisdom, and the deep importance in novelty and timeliness in all three. When he arrived, he apologized to his old friend, remarking that he was already too late. Later, Hoid acted as the carriage driver for Adolin when he is visiting Shallan at Sebarial's warcamp. He speaks to Kaladin about his flute and mentions that he wants an interesting story from him. When Shallan recognizes him she happily hugs him for his advice from three and a half years prior when he encouraged her at her worst and told her to keep seeking the light. Hoid, acting as Wit, visits Kaladin while he is in prison on , seven days into his imprisonment. He tells Kaladin the story of a man named Fleet who raced a highstorm across one end of Roshar to the other. Fleet wins, but dies of exhaustion at the end, and his spirit goes on to race the wind forever. The True Desolation \n\nAfter the start of the True Desolation circa , on the day that the Everstorm was projected to hit Shinovar on , he monologued to a Sleepless Hordling about the nature of art. After he finished his monologue, he met with Jasnah Kholin as she exited the Cognitive Realm, offering to travel with her. Siege of Kholinar \nHoid next appeared as Wit in Alethkar, discussing the nature of power with Shallan. Prior to that, while telling the story of Mishim in Alethkar, Hoid sees something next to his pack, which startles him. After the story, Shallan looks into Hoid's pack and sees a small, sealed black jar. The side of the jar pointing at Shallan was white. This might be a jar of sand from Taldain's Dayside, with the sand turning white showing Hoid a Surgebinder is near. This may be important, but not much is known about it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content="Hoid - During Hoid's conversation with Shallan, he says that he knew of a group like the Cult of Moments, describing them as equally foolish and dangerous. It is unclear at the moment which group he may be referring to. He later helps her get into the Cult of Moments, finding Shallan at her darkest moment, when she discovered the food she has been giving to the poor is just making things worse. Shalash, upon seeing sketches of Talenel and herself, wondered aloud why Midius, another name for Hoid, was giving away drawings of them. Bonding of Design \nShortly after the Battle of Thaylen Field circa , Hoid was in Kholinar insulting a Thaylen man in an attempt to elicit a reaction. Upon realizing that the man couldn't understand Alethi, Hoid decided that repeating it all in Thaylen would be boring, so he cut in front of the man. The man hit Hoid, knocking loose a tooth which Hoid discarded upon leaving the area. While in the city, he noticed Vatwha, recognizing her as an old acquaintance. Despite this old camaraderie, the Fused were trained to watch for him - most likely to capture him and deliver him to Odium. While walking through the city he found a child around the corpse of her mother, and used Awakening to lure her away from the body, leaving her in the care of a family in the city. He then headed to the palace where he finds a Cryptic, the spren Elhokar was about to bond before he died. This Spren was Design, and he bonded to her, becoming a Surgebinder of the Order of Lightweavers. During an unknown point in the year between his bonding of Design and the expedition in Emul and Singer occupation of Urithiru, he and Jasnah began a romantic relationship. Campaign in Emul \nHe and Jasnah both went to the expedition in Emul in . During their expedition, Ruthar angered them both greatly, and Jasnah sent him to insult the highprince. After doing so, Ruthar challenged him to combat, but he chose Jasnah as his champion. She easily stabbed him through the throat, but had Renarin heal him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content="Hoid - He later noticed that a Sleepless was spying upon him and Jasnah. When Kaladin was stuck in a vision by Odium, he and Design appeared to him in order to tell him the story of the Dog and the Dragon, in order to try and cheer him up and point him in the right direction. Writing the Contract and the Ascension of Taravangian \nHe and Jasnah worked together in order to write up a contract for the contest of champions with Odium. Some time after Taravangian took up Odium on , Hoid was visited by the new Vessel while he was telling stories at the Shattered Plains. Taravangian's demeanor revealed what happened to Hoid, who, terrified by the idea of Odium having a new Vessel, began to leave. Realizing that he was found out, Odium rammed into him with energy in order to lock him in place, trying to find a way to harm him without breaking the Shardic oath he was still held to. While searching, he discovered that Hoid kept his short-term memories stored in his Breaths. He destroyed these, erasing part of his memory, in order to redo the interaction. In this second interaction, Taravangian was able to interact with Hoid while successfully convincing the man that he was still Rayse. Hoid left this second conversation believing that everything had gone according to plan. However, afterwards he became aware of the fact that his memories were stolen and instituted protection protocols to defend himself if something or someone tried to interact with his soul. The destruction of his Breaths led him to falling below the Second Heightening, and losing his Perfect Pitch. Sigzil and the Dawnshard \n\nAt some point, Hoid asked his apprentice Sigzil to briefly take up the same Dawnshard that gave Hoid his immortality, an action that he believed would be necessary to avert calamity. Hoid passed the Dawnshard to Sigzil, who was changed in some ways that were similar to Hoid, acquiring the ability to Skip to any planet in the cosmere, as well as his own inability to do violence. This action would ultimately cause Sigzil to nearly kill his spren Auxiliary when the Dawnshard drew upon the Investiture that made up the spren in an attempt to defend itself. This action ruined Sigzil's life, and forced him to remain on the move outrunning the Night Brigade in their quest to capture him. Hoid regained possession of that Dawnshard again as well, meaning Sigzil was ultimately running from the Night Brigade to prevent them from finding Hoid. However, Hoid had come to feel sorrowful for his actions there, and felt like though his motivations were noble, the outcomes were ultimately not worth it and he was wrong to have done what he did. The Letters \n\nAt some point, he wrote a letter to Frost. He wrote about how he was being hunted by the Seventeenth Shard and has set a false trail for them to follow, referencing the three figures sent by the Seventeenth Shard that were searching for him. He came across as not at all worried about them, and in fact seemed mildly amused. He also asked Frost for his support in stopping Rayse, but was dismissed since Odium was trapped in the Rosharan system. He attempted to contact various Shards about Rayse and his worries that he would eventually escape. The figures he contacted were Endowment, Autonomy, and Harmony. The first two responded with aggressive dismissal, but Harmony was very receptive to his contact and responded curiosity and a desire for further contact. Due to him being more receptive towards his advances, he contacted Harmony again, and requested that he try to contact other Shards concerning the growing threat of Rayse's escape from the Rosharan System, a request he fulfilled."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content="Hoid - This contact resulted in a variety of different responses, which, as with his own attempts, resulted mostly in dismissal. Post-Catacendric Scadrial \n\nIn , following his actions on Roshar, Hoid returned to Scadrial to attend the wedding of Lord Joshin Yomen and Lady Mi'chelle Ostlin, two friends of his that he had made at some unknown point in the past. He did so via finding some way to bypass the strong Connection binding him to Roshar after becoming a Surgebinder\n \nRather than coming to Scadrial in response to some important event, Hoid initially came merely to congratulate his friends. He came dressed all in black, appearing as a scruffy looking beggar and spoke to the couple soon after they arrived at the dinner. It is unknown if he was present for the subsequent Vanisher attack. Hoid may have left the planet briefly afterwards, but something on Scadrial had caught his attention and he was back several months later. Hoid became employed as Waxillium Ladrian's new carriage driver. By that point he had become friendly with Wayne, who liked him but did not know anything about Hoid's true identity. When Wax headed to the precinct station to question Rian, Hoid drove the carriage and Wayne rode up front with him. During the carriage ride, Hoid eavesdropped on Wax's conversation with Harmony about Bleeder's plans to disrupt the Elendel Basin. Hoid's actions after this point are unclear. Hoid somehow obtained a coin-like unsealed metalmind containing a memory of Kelsier aiding the southern Scadrians in surviving the aftereffects of the Catacendre. He also spent some time in New Seran and following Nazh's theft of Nicki Savage's map of New Seran, Hoid asked her if she wanted to hear a story, an offer that she declined. He has also somehow come to the conclusion that he is the true owner of Kelesina Shores' mansion there, for somewhat legitimate but unknown reasons. He was apparently a regular intruder on the mansion grounds, to the irritation of the guards. During this time, Hoid took the appearance of a beggar with long, unkempt fingernails and a ragged shirt. Hoid appeared blind with milky white eyes. When Waxillium Ladrian walked up the path to Kelesina's mansion to attend a party with Steris Harms, Hoid climbed out of the bushes, startling Wax, although Wax did not recognise Hoid as his carriage driver through his disguise. Wanting to reveal Kelsier's resurrection and identity as the Sovereign, Hoid looked for an opportunity to pass on the unsealed metalmind. He asked Wax for a few clips. Steris noticed Hoid's cologne and asked him if he was wearing cologne. Hoid was startled by her observation and claimed that he had been drinking perfume, as it had quite a kick. Steris told him that that was unhealthy and Wax advised Hoid that he should leave the private grounds. Hoid agreed but claimed that it was his property and again asked for coins. Wax gave him a banknote and told him again to leave the grounds. Hoid claimed it was far too much and that he wished to give Waxillium change. As Wax walked away, Hoid threw the coin at Wax's head, who caught it in midair. A groundsman then noticed Hoid and tried to chase him off. Hoid laughed and escaped back into the bushes again. Hoid later became involved in the sting operation that Marasi ran in Bilming in . He had a silent interaction with Moonlight from different trucks. Moonlight commented that she couldn't tell whether she was watching Hoid or if Hoid was watching her, but then resolved that they were both just keeping an eye on the same third parties. After Wax arrived in Bilming, and gave chase to Dumad he casually appeared in a sleek black car to give Wax a ride. In Bilming, he traded his harmonica with Wayne for a rat named Sir Squeekins. Since this event, he has been taking good care of Sir Squeekins. He also showed up to rescue Wax from the ocean in a small boat after the explosion of the Pewternaut A16. Bet with the Sorceress of Lumar \nHoid would later go on to visit the planet of Lumar, a relative backwater in the cosmere. At some point he informed his friend, the kandra Ulaam, of his intentions to visit the planet via letter. Still hoping to gain access to AonDor, he met with Riina, who was living on the planet in the guise the Sorceress of the Midnight Sea. While visiting her island, Hoid agreed to a bet with her. Riina would be allowed to place him under a curse, and in exchange, if he could successfully break it, he would be granted admission to the Elantrians and the ability to use AonDor. The curse placed on him stripped him of his sense of humor, sense of style, sense of decorum, sense of purpose, intelligence, and sense of self. In order to break the curse, he would need to return to the central room of the Sorceress' ship on her island. As a part of the curse, he was also forbidden from telling anyone any information about his curse, how he had been given it, or how it could be broken. Riina finished her casting by sending Hoid far away from the Midnight Sea. During his time here, he likely came into possession of some Midnight spores. While under the effects of this curse, Hoid's behavior bore little resemblance to his normal personality. He dressed quite oddly, trying at times to wear every shade of orange he could find, or his red-sequined briefs."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content="Hoid - He spent time doing things like inventing the card game Kings, in which you hold your cards backwards and can see everyone's hand but your own, an invention that lost him many of his possessions. Bad jokes and nonsensical ideas filled basically all his time, and he was only very rarely able to think clearly enough to communicate anything meaningful or work to accomplish his goals. He was left with some dim awareness of his situation though, a cruel decision on the part of Riina who wanted him aware enough to be horrified by his situation."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content="Hoid - Any attempt to share information about his curse would only start him stuttering and send him back to his normal befuddled state. Hoid spent a long time at sea, wandering without apparent progress at breaking his curse. Ulaam eventually arrived on the planet and found Hoid, but was uninterested in working too hard to free him from his curse, preferring to simply stick close and wait for the problem to resolve itself. The two of them spent at least a year traveling together in this way. Eventually Hoid would become the cabin boy of the Whistlebow. He came into contact with Charlie, son of the duke of Diggen's Point and returned there to give Tress a ceramic cup and Charlie's first letter to her. Later, he was traded for by Fort for a large sum on the orders of Captain Crow who was interested in Hoid once she had heard that he had been cursed by the Sorceress. Hoid settled onto a routine onto the Crow's Song, working as a cabin boy there as well, and kept fed despite his near-uselessness by Fort. Ulaam continued as his companion, and the two were suffered by the crew despite their oddities, due in part to Ulaam's skill with medicine. During his time on the Crow's Song, Hoid gave midnight spores to Weev, the ship's sprouter, believing them to be licorice. Another of his shipmates, Tress, became interested in Hoid's past after Ulaam explained to her that Hoid had been cursed, and approached him on the deck of the ship to try to obtain information about the Sorcess despite his curse. Hoid was unable to say much of note, but he dimly realized she was trying to help him and was able to offer some cryptic clues, asking Tress to bring him to her planet so he could save her, meaning the map of Lumar present on the Sorceress's ship. He also told her to look for a grouping of six stars, a carving under her bed, which would lead her to Weev's secret supply of midnight aether. After Tress recovered the midnight aether, Ulaam confronted Hoid, asking if he had given the aether to her. Ulaam and Tress continued to press Hoid for information and he was able to tell them to look for a person that is not a person and could talk when they should not, which they realized referred to Charlie in his guise of Huck the rat. As the Crow's Song continued its journey into the Crimson Sea, Hoid continued to stymie Tress's attempts to wheedle more information out of him, unable to point at words on a sheet of paper that might be relevant to his curse. However, Tress realized that he she could glean information from his silences though, as he stopped speaking when the subject turned to the matter of his curse. This allowed him to indicate to her where Riina's island might be found on a map. As they traveled closer to the Midnight Sea, Huck convinced the addled Hoid to dump much of the ship's food and water overboard, in an unsuccessful attempt to force the crew to return the to Emerald Sea. Later when the Crow's Song reached the Sorceress's island, the ship's crew carried Hoid into the Sorceress's ship to save Tress and Huck, who had realized that bringing Hoid to the center of the Sorceress's power would break the curse, and hopefully allow him to defeat her. When Hoid entered the tower, the terms of the bet were fulfilled and he was restored to his sense and transformed into an Elantrian. Hoid arrived just in time to use AonDor to throw up a shield and prevent Riina from cursing Tress. In the brief confrontation that followed, Riina judged that she was not confident enough that she could defeat Hoid to risk a direct confrontation with him, instead choosing to flee the planet and let Hoid, Tress, and Charlie go free. While Hoid was unable to directly remove the curse on Charlie, he was able to tweak the parameters so that Charlie could break the curse himself once he returned to Diggen's Point with Tress. Hoid may have lingered with them for some time giving Charlie some pointers on storytelling and music. Hoid would later share his adventure with Tress and Charlie as a story to an unknown audience, potentially made up of people from the planet First of the Sun. It is unknown exactly when he tells this story relative to the events, but it is known to be within years or decades, but less than centuries. Meeting with Sigzil on Canticle \nWhen Hoid's apprentice Sigzil arrived on Canticle, Sigzil's spren Auxiliary used some Investiture they had acquired to temporarily reinforce Sigzil's Connection to Hoid, allowing Hoid to appear before Sigzil as an illusion. Sigzil remained angry with Hoid for the betrayal, feeling as if he had been tricked and used by Wit when he was asked to take up the Dawnshard, and forced into his life of fleeing the Night Brigade. He confronted Hoid in anger for this and his betrayal in the warcamps. Hoid responded by explaining to Sigzil that he had taken him on as an apprentice due to his hunger for answers to all his questions. Hoid reminded Sigzil that while that it was a good instinct, it's important to realize that the questions are more important than the answers themselves sometimes. As the Connection faded, Hoid apologized sincerely to Sigzil for his mistake, and for ruining his life. Frozen on Komashi \n\nAt some point after Sigzil's overthrowing of the Cinder King, Hoid went with Design to Komashi and was almost instantly frozen in place, unable to move. This was due to the protection measures that he instituted to prevent other entities from interfering with his Investiture after recovering from Odium's destruction of his breaths."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content='Hoid - It activated as, immediately upon his arrival, the father machine attempted to absorb his Investiture to power itself. Seeing his state, Design spraypainted him copper and used him as a coatrack in her new noodle shop, the Noodle Pupil. At some point following his stasis, he formed a Connection with Painter, Yumi, and Liyun allowing him to tell what they were doing, feeling, and thinking, along with many others on the planet, though he felt it with them particularly acutely, and knew it had something to do with him. After the father machine was destroyed by Yumi, and the attempts to absorb his Investiture thus halted, he was freed from his stasis. He planned with Design to disguise themselves as astronauts and steal a ship, allowing them to travel to the nearby Iron Seven Waystation. He kept in contact with Nikaro, Yumi, and Masaka, via letters and inquiries, allowing him to keep up with their lives and how society coped with the loss of the shroud.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ff13a4ea-8b04-4dd2-a25b-551b50c8000d'}, page_content='Hoid - He would eventually tell the story of Yumi and Painter to an unknown audience on Roshar, with permission from those involved. It is possible that Hoid had been to Komashi at some point before the activation of the father machine, as he had some implied familiarity with some elements of Torish culture.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Origins', 'order': 22, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '33e49c38-f58a-4a2c-af08-232f045942af'}, page_content='Hoid -  Origins \n\nThe individual who would later become known as Hoid was born on Yolen sometime prior to the Shattering of Adonalsium. He was born naturally and his parents were married. From an early age he developed a fascination with the topic of whether life existed on other planets and often listened to local philosophers debate the topic. During this period before the Shattering, Hoid learned Yolish Lightweaving, which sometimes got him into trouble. Some of his oldest aliases, one of which likely came from a former master of his, also date back to this period; among these are Hoid, which he says he stole from someone he should have loved, and Cepandrius Maxtori. Eventually, Hoid met the dragon Frost, who is his elder by a small amount, though Hoid may have already started aging strangely by that time. Shortly thereafter, Hoid also met the people who would become the sixteen original Vessels. His early relationships with the future Vessels seem to have been amicable; he went out for drinks with Tanavast at least once, considered Ati to be a kind and generous man, and became friends with Rayse. At some point, for a variety of reasons, the future Vessels resolved to kill Adonalsium; Hoid considered doing so to be somewhat necessary and was only loosely involved in their plan, though he was present for the actual Shattering. At the Shattering, he was offered one of the newly-created Shards, which he refused; even millennia later, he regards this as having been a wise decision because it allows him a greater degree of freedom.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Origins', 'order': 22, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '33e49c38-f58a-4a2c-af08-232f045942af'}, page_content="Hoid - In his conversations with the new Vessels, he implied that his rejection of a Shard meant he would not interfere with their affairs, though given his interest in being able to do as he pleased it seems unlikely he actually intended to leave them alone. The Shattering appears to have been a turning point in his relationships with many of the Vessels, as he seems to look down on them for being so eager to Ascend, while Edgli at least looks down on him continuing to involve himself in the affairs of the cosmere after refusing a Shard; additionally, the Shattering may be the origin of his grudge against Rayse and Bavadin. At some point early in the history of the cosmere, Hoid held a Dawnshard; this Dawnshard appears to have been associated with a piece of topaz. Hoid apparently attempted to do something more with the gemstone for a long time, but ultimately was forced to admit that it had become worthless because he wore it. His  association with this gem earned him the name Topaz and the title Bearer of the First Gem. Holding a Dawnshard also permanently altered Hoid's spiritweb; among other things, these alterations make him unable to harm others or consume meat, allow him to heal from nearly any injury, and are likely the cause of his immortality. Hoid's involvement in important events early in the history of the cosmere has had significant effects on his relationship to Investiture. The fact that he comes from before the Shattering, when magic worked much differently, makes Investiture sometimes act oddly with regard to him; the Shattering also appears to have changed magic such that his Yolish Lightweaving is no longer fully functional. Additionally, his connection to certain events involving the Dawnshards makes some uses of Investiture particularly dangerous for him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Desolations', 'order': 23, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '930248a3-68b2-4313-a0d4-3e5c0287d163'}, page_content='Hoid -  The Desolations \nAt some point after the Shattering, Hoid visited Roshar and mingled with the original inhabitants of the world, even dancing with the ancient singers. He grew to be close with one singer known as Vatwha. He knew the Heralds, and they recognize him by the name Midius. He was the one that taught them how they could use Investiture to enhance their memories.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Desolations', 'order': 23, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '930248a3-68b2-4313-a0d4-3e5c0287d163'}, page_content="Hoid - Whether he knew them before or after the Oathpact, or the exact nature of their relationship, is unclear. Hoid came to be worshipped by the Unkalaki as Lunu'anaki, the god of travel and mischief who cannot hurt man. Hoid founded the Worldsingers, and has the rank of Master Worldsinger, and at some point in the early Sixth Epoch, he took Senne Khald as his apprentice, and assigned her with the task of writing a treatise on all the Radiant Orders. He has been to Aimia at some point. Hoid attempted to bond a Nahel spren at some point before the Recreance, possibly during a Desolation, but presumably failed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Crisis in the Diem', 'order': 24, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '76f2667f-ee17-4086-9f95-6f305c92ef7f'}, page_content='Hoid -  Crisis in the Diem \nHoid traveled to Taldain, though for what reasons are unknown. He was there when the Taishin were deciding whether or not to disband the Diem.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Crisis in the Diem', 'order': 24, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '76f2667f-ee17-4086-9f95-6f305c92ef7f'}, page_content='Hoid - Hoid later got onto the boat Khriss took to return to Darkside, where he sang a song to the passengers about the meaning of art.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Restoration of Elantris and Theft of the Moon Scepter', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd867ff1c-bb75-454a-b390-adcb00061c3e'}, page_content="Hoid -  The Restoration of Elantris and Theft of the Moon Scepter \n\nHoid traveled to Sel, likely making use of Devotion's Perpendicularity in Arelon. Hoid spoke to the skaze, and seems to have made some sort of agreement with them hinging on his desire to become an Elantrian with the restoration of Elantris."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Restoration of Elantris and Theft of the Moon Scepter', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd867ff1c-bb75-454a-b390-adcb00061c3e'}, page_content="Hoid - Hoid disguised himself as a beggar, wrapped in bandages. He helped Sarene smuggle weapons into Elantris. Following the restoration of the city by Raoden, Hoid traveled to the Pool to meet a skaze. He removed his bandages, hoping to find himself transformed into an Elantrian, but the transformation had not occurred. The skaze ridiculed Hoid for his failure, but Hoid expressed his joy that secrets still remained unknown to him and then entered the Perpendicularity and transitioned to the Cognitive Realm. Hoid returned to Sel several years later, and found himself a position in the court of Emperor Ashravan in the Rose Empire as the Royal Fool. He allied himself with the Forger Shai in her attempt to steal the Moon Scepter, an artifact that allows for the translation of the various symbols of Selish Investiture. He arranged for her to be caught after she'd left the Gallery with the Scepter, later using her duplicate to steal the scepter for himself. Hoid stole the Moon Scepter in order to help him translate between various symbols and gain access to the magics on Sel. At some point, he and Shai ran into each other once again, after Shai devoted herself towards finding him again to take her revenge."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Collapse of the Final Empire and Catacendre', 'order': 26, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '55f9ab9b-3465-41db-b1bc-1634939f4e36'}, page_content="Hoid -  The Collapse of the Final Empire and Catacendre \nHoid arrived on Scadrial, likely through Ruin's perpendicularity in the Pits of Hathsin. He took up the guise of an informant, pretending to have bad eyesight in order to make himself less threatening to people seeking information from him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Collapse of the Final Empire and Catacendre', 'order': 26, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '55f9ab9b-3465-41db-b1bc-1634939f4e36'}, page_content="Hoid - At some point he became known to both Dockson and Ashweather Cett. Kelsier, pretending to be a nobleman, contacted Hoid in , requesting information on House Renoux. Hoid (closed shop, smoking tobacco) met with Kelsier on the streets of Luthadel and told him that House Renoux was buying large amounts of weapons and armor from various noble houses and that Lord Renoux was considering a marriage between Valette and Elend Venture. He also claimed that Renoux was rumored to have some sort of leverage on Venture and that he knew Shan Elariel to be a Soother. At some point following this, he left Scadrial to attend to other business, again likely via the Pits. Around a year later, in , Hoid returned to Scadrial, traveling through Scadrial's subastral, riding on the back of a Cognitive Shadow to the Well of Ascension, Preservation's Perpendicularity. He was using an oar coated with a strange glowing substance connected to the substance drunk by members of the Ire. He encountered the Shadow of Kelsier, who asked for help returning to the Physical Realm. Hoid told him that there was nothing to be done, but he challenged Kelsier to an insult battle, with the prize being the true answer to one question. Kelsier instead threatened Hoid. Hoid attempted to enter the pool, but Kelsier attacked him. Hoid easily overpowered Kelsier and caused him serious pain, but not permanent injury. Hoid then transitioned through the Well and stole a bead of lerasium from the adjacent room. He later consumed the lerasium and became a Mistborn. When Kelsier spoke of the incident to Preservation, Preservation spoke briefly on Hoid, calling him Cephandrius. Later, Kelsier told Khriss and Nazh about his meeting with Hoid, and they seemed distressed to know that he had arrived and stolen a bead of lerasium. Hoid then traveled to the Terris Dominance to figure out Feruchemy, and then became wrapped up in matters he did not anticipate. This may refer to him becoming involved after the Inquisitor attack on Tathingdwen and the slaughter of the Synod. Hoid took up the guise of a Terris leader and led the Terris refugees to the Central Dominance. A year later, in , Hoid was in Fadrex City, again acting as an informant, and Ashweather Cett suggested Vin speak to him. Just before Vin arrived, Kelsier's Cognitive Shadow noticed Hoid from within the Cognitive Realm. Kelsier tried to touch Hoid's soul, but was rebuffed by a shock that numbed his hand. At that moment, Vin arrived intending to meet with Hoid, but Kelsier attempted to warn her away. Since he was in the Cognitive Realm, he couldn't communicate with her directly, but she did sense that something was off about Hoid and instead chose not to speak to him. He has travelled to Scadrial several times between the Catacendre and the True Desolation, but actively hid from Harmony."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Collapse of the Final Empire and Catacendre', 'order': 26, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '55f9ab9b-3465-41db-b1bc-1634939f4e36'}, page_content='Hoid - During these visits he accomplished much, but what exactly he was doing is currently unknown.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Pahn Kahl Rebellion', 'order': 27, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6fba4eb4-9e99-48e7-aa1b-1e54a467a10f'}, page_content="Hoid -  The Pahn Kahl Rebellion \nSeveral centuries later, around Hallandren year 327, Hoid traveled to Nalthis and took the role of a master storyteller. Lightsong summoned him to the Court of the Gods, where he recounted the story of Vo, explained the origin of the Hallandren God Kings, and answered Lightsong and Siri's questions. He likely achieved perfect pitch while on this world by obtaining additional Breaths. At some later point, Vivenna also met Hoid; she later described him as one of the only people on Nalthis that is cosmere-aware."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Pahn Kahl Rebellion', 'order': 27, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6fba4eb4-9e99-48e7-aa1b-1e54a467a10f'}, page_content='Hoid - Hoid spent a lot of time gambling on Nalthis, and was fairly renowned. He would arrange things so that he could never lose, and then bet everything on himself. However, someone else managed to arrange it so that he couldn\'t win, either, resulting in a tie and the loss of his winnings. Vasher once met Hoid when he was using the alias "Dust", several years before Vasher\'s activities on Roshar.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Obrodai', 'order': 28, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7f17556c-515a-40bf-9763-c723d88a343d'}, page_content='Hoid -  Obrodai \nHoid visited Obrodai at some point prior to the True Desolation. A female avatar was created by Autonomy and instilled with a great dislike of Hoid in order to prevent him from returning there.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Prelude to the True Desolation', 'order': 29, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'eb205be1-34b1-4929-a6ca-38b1428feca2'}, page_content='Hoid -  Prelude to the True Desolation \n\nAccording to Cord, when her grandmother served as watcher of the pool, Hoid warned the Unkalaki about the Gods Who Sleep Not. Rock also described an encounter with him in the Horneater Oceans. In a departure from his modus operandi, Hoid played a more conspicuous role in the events on Roshar, as his goal was to become a Radiant. He has been to Threnody at some point before this visit to Roshar. At some point, Sigzil became his apprentice. As master and apprentice, they traveled all across Roshar, including to Babatharnam. He had to pay to have Sigzil freed from prison on three separate occasions. This relationship essentially ended after Sigzil attempted (and failed) to kill somebody and wound up punished via being made into a slave and bridgeman. In  during the Middlefest Fair in Jah Keved, Shallan Davar met Hoid disguised as a messenger, and he spoke with her. Seeing that she was emotionally distressed, he used emotional Allomancy in order to soothe her, and encouraged her to keep on pushing forward despite her struggles. This meeting would leave a deep impression upon Shallan, and she would remember him for years after the event. He met Lift at some point after her blessing by the Nightwatcher in , but before her heist on the Bronze Palace in .'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Prelude to the True Desolation', 'order': 29, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'eb205be1-34b1-4929-a6ca-38b1428feca2'}, page_content='Hoid - She was fond of him, and they parted ways when he jumped into the mouth of a greatshell. Ishikk was hired by three men from the Seventeenth Shard to search for Hoid in the Purelake, though all four failed to find him. He searched for five months, though came up with no results. The War of Reckoning \nOnly a few months before the greatshell hunt on , he became the King\'s Wit, Elhokar Kholin\'s court jester. As the king lived at the Shattered Plains in order to better lead his people during the War of Reckoning, Wit spent most of his time at the plains. He was aware of Sigzil being held in slavery at the plains, but still avoided interacting with him, though not necessarily out of a lack of care. Through his role as Wit, he kept his eyes upon and influenced Dalinar Kholin, going so far as to ask him if he has ever heard the term "Adonalsium", as he believed that he was involved in secret societies such as the Sons of Honor, and thought that Gavilar Kholin confided in him; his suspicions were proven wrong.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Prelude to the True Desolation', 'order': 29, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'eb205be1-34b1-4929-a6ca-38b1428feca2'}, page_content="Hoid - He also told Kaladin the story of Derethil and the Wandersail on . During the course of the story, Hoid uses a special, ancient flute called a Trailman's flute. It is also likely that he used his Yolish Lightweaving to cause the smoke from the fire to take the form of various elements from his story. He told the story in order to teach Kaladin to take responsibility. As he sent him off, he gave him his Trailman's flute, and asked him to take care of Sigzil. Hoid was in Kholinar when Taln arrived to herald the coming of the Desolation on . Before his arrival, he was discussing with a few guards the nature of creativity, invention, and wisdom, and the deep importance in novelty and timeliness in all three. When he arrived, he apologized to his old friend, remarking that he was already too late. Later, Hoid acted as the carriage driver for Adolin when he is visiting Shallan at Sebarial's warcamp. He speaks to Kaladin about his flute and mentions that he wants an interesting story from him. When Shallan recognizes him she happily hugs him for his advice from three and a half years prior when he encouraged her at her worst and told her to keep seeking the light. Hoid, acting as Wit, visits Kaladin while he is in prison on , seven days into his imprisonment. He tells Kaladin the story of a man named Fleet who raced a highstorm across one end of Roshar to the other. Fleet wins, but dies of exhaustion at the end, and his spirit goes on to race the wind forever."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War of Reckoning', 'order': 30, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f6a96374-d984-4fc7-8a2b-084ee7c63363'}, page_content='Hoid -  The War of Reckoning \nOnly a few months before the greatshell hunt on , he became the King\'s Wit, Elhokar Kholin\'s court jester. As the king lived at the Shattered Plains in order to better lead his people during the War of Reckoning, Wit spent most of his time at the plains. He was aware of Sigzil being held in slavery at the plains, but still avoided interacting with him, though not necessarily out of a lack of care. Through his role as Wit, he kept his eyes upon and influenced Dalinar Kholin, going so far as to ask him if he has ever heard the term "Adonalsium", as he believed that he was involved in secret societies such as the Sons of Honor, and thought that Gavilar Kholin confided in him; his suspicions were proven wrong.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The War of Reckoning', 'order': 30, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f6a96374-d984-4fc7-8a2b-084ee7c63363'}, page_content="Hoid - He also told Kaladin the story of Derethil and the Wandersail on . During the course of the story, Hoid uses a special, ancient flute called a Trailman's flute. It is also likely that he used his Yolish Lightweaving to cause the smoke from the fire to take the form of various elements from his story. He told the story in order to teach Kaladin to take responsibility. As he sent him off, he gave him his Trailman's flute, and asked him to take care of Sigzil. Hoid was in Kholinar when Taln arrived to herald the coming of the Desolation on . Before his arrival, he was discussing with a few guards the nature of creativity, invention, and wisdom, and the deep importance in novelty and timeliness in all three. When he arrived, he apologized to his old friend, remarking that he was already too late. Later, Hoid acted as the carriage driver for Adolin when he is visiting Shallan at Sebarial's warcamp. He speaks to Kaladin about his flute and mentions that he wants an interesting story from him. When Shallan recognizes him she happily hugs him for his advice from three and a half years prior when he encouraged her at her worst and told her to keep seeking the light. Hoid, acting as Wit, visits Kaladin while he is in prison on , seven days into his imprisonment. He tells Kaladin the story of a man named Fleet who raced a highstorm across one end of Roshar to the other. Fleet wins, but dies of exhaustion at the end, and his spirit goes on to race the wind forever."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The True Desolation', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ad5e078e-55e0-4994-b511-854046fc42c5'}, page_content="Hoid -  The True Desolation \n\nAfter the start of the True Desolation circa , on the day that the Everstorm was projected to hit Shinovar on , he monologued to a Sleepless Hordling about the nature of art. After he finished his monologue, he met with Jasnah Kholin as she exited the Cognitive Realm, offering to travel with her. Siege of Kholinar \nHoid next appeared as Wit in Alethkar, discussing the nature of power with Shallan. Prior to that, while telling the story of Mishim in Alethkar, Hoid sees something next to his pack, which startles him. After the story, Shallan looks into Hoid's pack and sees a small, sealed black jar. The side of the jar pointing at Shallan was white. This might be a jar of sand from Taldain's Dayside, with the sand turning white showing Hoid a Surgebinder is near. This may be important, but not much is known about it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The True Desolation', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ad5e078e-55e0-4994-b511-854046fc42c5'}, page_content="Hoid - During Hoid's conversation with Shallan, he says that he knew of a group like the Cult of Moments, describing them as equally foolish and dangerous. It is unclear at the moment which group he may be referring to. He later helps her get into the Cult of Moments, finding Shallan at her darkest moment, when she discovered the food she has been giving to the poor is just making things worse. Shalash, upon seeing sketches of Talenel and herself, wondered aloud why Midius, another name for Hoid, was giving away drawings of them. Bonding of Design \nShortly after the Battle of Thaylen Field circa , Hoid was in Kholinar insulting a Thaylen man in an attempt to elicit a reaction. Upon realizing that the man couldn't understand Alethi, Hoid decided that repeating it all in Thaylen would be boring, so he cut in front of the man."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The True Desolation', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ad5e078e-55e0-4994-b511-854046fc42c5'}, page_content='Hoid - The man hit Hoid, knocking loose a tooth which Hoid discarded upon leaving the area. While in the city, he noticed Vatwha, recognizing her as an old acquaintance. Despite this old camaraderie, the Fused were trained to watch for him - most likely to capture him and deliver him to Odium. While walking through the city he found a child around the corpse of her mother, and used Awakening to lure her away from the body, leaving her in the care of a family in the city. He then headed to the palace where he finds a Cryptic, the spren Elhokar was about to bond before he died. This Spren was Design, and he bonded to her, becoming a Surgebinder of the Order of Lightweavers. During an unknown point in the year between his bonding of Design and the expedition in Emul and Singer occupation of Urithiru, he and Jasnah began a romantic relationship. Campaign in Emul \nHe and Jasnah both went to the expedition in Emul in . During their expedition, Ruthar angered them both greatly, and Jasnah sent him to insult the highprince. After doing so, Ruthar challenged him to combat, but he chose Jasnah as his champion. She easily stabbed him through the throat, but had Renarin heal him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The True Desolation', 'order': 31, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ad5e078e-55e0-4994-b511-854046fc42c5'}, page_content="Hoid - He later noticed that a Sleepless was spying upon him and Jasnah. When Kaladin was stuck in a vision by Odium, he and Design appeared to him in order to tell him the story of the Dog and the Dragon, in order to try and cheer him up and point him in the right direction. Writing the Contract and the Ascension of Taravangian \nHe and Jasnah worked together in order to write up a contract for the contest of champions with Odium. Some time after Taravangian took up Odium on , Hoid was visited by the new Vessel while he was telling stories at the Shattered Plains. Taravangian's demeanor revealed what happened to Hoid, who, terrified by the idea of Odium having a new Vessel, began to leave. Realizing that he was found out, Odium rammed into him with energy in order to lock him in place, trying to find a way to harm him without breaking the Shardic oath he was still held to. While searching, he discovered that Hoid kept his short-term memories stored in his Breaths. He destroyed these, erasing part of his memory, in order to redo the interaction. In this second interaction, Taravangian was able to interact with Hoid while successfully convincing the man that he was still Rayse. Hoid left this second conversation believing that everything had gone according to plan. However, afterwards he became aware of the fact that his memories were stolen and instituted protection protocols to defend himself if something or someone tried to interact with his soul. The destruction of his Breaths led him to falling below the Second Heightening, and losing his Perfect Pitch. Sigzil and the Dawnshard \n\nAt some point, Hoid asked his apprentice Sigzil to briefly take up the same Dawnshard that gave Hoid his immortality, an action that he believed would be necessary to avert calamity. Hoid passed the Dawnshard to Sigzil, who was changed in some ways that were similar to Hoid, acquiring the ability to Skip to any planet in the cosmere, as well as his own inability to do violence. This action would ultimately cause Sigzil to nearly kill his spren Auxiliary when the Dawnshard drew upon the Investiture that made up the spren in an attempt to defend itself. This action ruined Sigzil's life, and forced him to remain on the move outrunning the Night Brigade in their quest to capture him. Hoid regained possession of that Dawnshard again as well, meaning Sigzil was ultimately running from the Night Brigade to prevent them from finding Hoid. However, Hoid had come to feel sorrowful for his actions there, and felt like though his motivations were noble, the outcomes were ultimately not worth it and he was wrong to have done what he did. The Letters \n\nAt some point, he wrote a letter to Frost. He wrote about how he was being hunted by the Seventeenth Shard and has set a false trail for them to follow, referencing the three figures sent by the Seventeenth Shard that were searching for him. He came across as not at all worried about them, and in fact seemed mildly amused. He also asked Frost for his support in stopping Rayse, but was dismissed since Odium was trapped in the Rosharan system. He attempted to contact various Shards about Rayse and his worries that he would eventually escape. The figures he contacted were Endowment, Autonomy, and Harmony. The first two responded with aggressive dismissal, but Harmony was very receptive to his contact and responded curiosity and a desire for further contact. Due to him being more receptive towards his advances, he contacted Harmony again, and requested that he try to contact other Shards concerning the growing threat of Rayse's escape from the Rosharan System, a request he fulfilled. This contact resulted in a variety of different responses, which, as with his own attempts, resulted mostly in dismissal."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Siege of Kholinar', 'order': 32, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd86ee30c-f2d7-47b4-a487-870bb2dd6e99'}, page_content="Hoid -  Siege of Kholinar \nHoid next appeared as Wit in Alethkar, discussing the nature of power with Shallan. Prior to that, while telling the story of Mishim in Alethkar, Hoid sees something next to his pack, which startles him. After the story, Shallan looks into Hoid's pack and sees a small, sealed black jar. The side of the jar pointing at Shallan was white. This might be a jar of sand from Taldain's Dayside, with the sand turning white showing Hoid a Surgebinder is near. This may be important, but not much is known about it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Siege of Kholinar', 'order': 32, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd86ee30c-f2d7-47b4-a487-870bb2dd6e99'}, page_content="Hoid - During Hoid's conversation with Shallan, he says that he knew of a group like the Cult of Moments, describing them as equally foolish and dangerous. It is unclear at the moment which group he may be referring to. He later helps her get into the Cult of Moments, finding Shallan at her darkest moment, when she discovered the food she has been giving to the poor is just making things worse. Shalash, upon seeing sketches of Talenel and herself, wondered aloud why Midius, another name for Hoid, was giving away drawings of them."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bonding of Design', 'order': 33, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c2277aa9-4b1c-4096-924d-d857ad2e0cea'}, page_content="Hoid -  Bonding of Design \nShortly after the Battle of Thaylen Field circa , Hoid was in Kholinar insulting a Thaylen man in an attempt to elicit a reaction. Upon realizing that the man couldn't understand Alethi, Hoid decided that repeating it all in Thaylen would be boring, so he cut in front of the man. The man hit Hoid, knocking loose a tooth which Hoid discarded upon leaving the area. While in the city, he noticed Vatwha, recognizing her as an old acquaintance."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bonding of Design', 'order': 33, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c2277aa9-4b1c-4096-924d-d857ad2e0cea'}, page_content='Hoid - Despite this old camaraderie, the Fused were trained to watch for him - most likely to capture him and deliver him to Odium. While walking through the city he found a child around the corpse of her mother, and used Awakening to lure her away from the body, leaving her in the care of a family in the city. He then headed to the palace where he finds a Cryptic, the spren Elhokar was about to bond before he died. This Spren was Design, and he bonded to her, becoming a Surgebinder of the Order of Lightweavers. During an unknown point in the year between his bonding of Design and the expedition in Emul and Singer occupation of Urithiru, he and Jasnah began a romantic relationship.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Campaign in Emul', 'order': 34, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '433e90dc-1323-4040-8ba6-864f219505ea'}, page_content='Hoid -  Campaign in Emul \nHe and Jasnah both went to the expedition in Emul in . During their expedition, Ruthar angered them both greatly, and Jasnah sent him to insult the highprince. After doing so, Ruthar challenged him to combat, but he chose Jasnah as his champion. She easily stabbed him through the throat, but had Renarin heal him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Campaign in Emul', 'order': 34, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '433e90dc-1323-4040-8ba6-864f219505ea'}, page_content='Hoid - He later noticed that a Sleepless was spying upon him and Jasnah. When Kaladin was stuck in a vision by Odium, he and Design appeared to him in order to tell him the story of the Dog and the Dragon, in order to try and cheer him up and point him in the right direction.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Writing the Contract and the Ascension of Taravangian', 'order': 35, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0289e322-c940-45b0-8572-f631fde8af6f'}, page_content="Hoid -  Writing the Contract and the Ascension of Taravangian \nHe and Jasnah worked together in order to write up a contract for the contest of champions with Odium. Some time after Taravangian took up Odium on , Hoid was visited by the new Vessel while he was telling stories at the Shattered Plains. Taravangian's demeanor revealed what happened to Hoid, who, terrified by the idea of Odium having a new Vessel, began to leave. Realizing that he was found out, Odium rammed into him with energy in order to lock him in place, trying to find a way to harm him without breaking the Shardic oath he was still held to. While searching, he discovered that Hoid kept his short-term memories stored in his Breaths."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Writing the Contract and the Ascension of Taravangian', 'order': 35, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0289e322-c940-45b0-8572-f631fde8af6f'}, page_content='Hoid - He destroyed these, erasing part of his memory, in order to redo the interaction. In this second interaction, Taravangian was able to interact with Hoid while successfully convincing the man that he was still Rayse. Hoid left this second conversation believing that everything had gone according to plan. However, afterwards he became aware of the fact that his memories were stolen and instituted protection protocols to defend himself if something or someone tried to interact with his soul. The destruction of his Breaths led him to falling below the Second Heightening, and losing his Perfect Pitch.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sigzil and the Dawnshard', 'order': 36, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cbfd02dc-78cb-4ff7-85a5-c6423f655f94'}, page_content='Hoid -  Sigzil and the Dawnshard \n\nAt some point, Hoid asked his apprentice Sigzil to briefly take up the same Dawnshard that gave Hoid his immortality, an action that he believed would be necessary to avert calamity. Hoid passed the Dawnshard to Sigzil, who was changed in some ways that were similar to Hoid, acquiring the ability to Skip to any planet in the cosmere, as well as his own inability to do violence. This action would ultimately cause Sigzil to nearly kill his spren Auxiliary when the Dawnshard drew upon the Investiture that made up the spren in an attempt to defend itself.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sigzil and the Dawnshard', 'order': 36, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cbfd02dc-78cb-4ff7-85a5-c6423f655f94'}, page_content="Hoid - This action ruined Sigzil's life, and forced him to remain on the move outrunning the Night Brigade in their quest to capture him. Hoid regained possession of that Dawnshard again as well, meaning Sigzil was ultimately running from the Night Brigade to prevent them from finding Hoid. However, Hoid had come to feel sorrowful for his actions there, and felt like though his motivations were noble, the outcomes were ultimately not worth it and he was wrong to have done what he did."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Letters', 'order': 37, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be78f2bb-2904-40da-a040-2cf7632cc765'}, page_content='Hoid -  The Letters \n\nAt some point, he wrote a letter to Frost. He wrote about how he was being hunted by the Seventeenth Shard and has set a false trail for them to follow, referencing the three figures sent by the Seventeenth Shard that were searching for him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Letters', 'order': 37, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'be78f2bb-2904-40da-a040-2cf7632cc765'}, page_content="Hoid - He came across as not at all worried about them, and in fact seemed mildly amused. He also asked Frost for his support in stopping Rayse, but was dismissed since Odium was trapped in the Rosharan system. He attempted to contact various Shards about Rayse and his worries that he would eventually escape. The figures he contacted were Endowment, Autonomy, and Harmony. The first two responded with aggressive dismissal, but Harmony was very receptive to his contact and responded curiosity and a desire for further contact. Due to him being more receptive towards his advances, he contacted Harmony again, and requested that he try to contact other Shards concerning the growing threat of Rayse's escape from the Rosharan System, a request he fulfilled. This contact resulted in a variety of different responses, which, as with his own attempts, resulted mostly in dismissal."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Post-Catacendric Scadrial', 'order': 38, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7b0ce9de-e821-4f7f-8be1-8464b4332640'}, page_content="Hoid -  Post-Catacendric Scadrial \n\nIn , following his actions on Roshar, Hoid returned to Scadrial to attend the wedding of Lord Joshin Yomen and Lady Mi'chelle Ostlin, two friends of his that he had made at some unknown point in the past. He did so via finding some way to bypass the strong Connection binding him to Roshar after becoming a Surgebinder\n \nRather than coming to Scadrial in response to some important event, Hoid initially came merely to congratulate his friends. He came dressed all in black, appearing as a scruffy looking beggar and spoke to the couple soon after they arrived at the dinner. It is unknown if he was present for the subsequent Vanisher attack. Hoid may have left the planet briefly afterwards, but something on Scadrial had caught his attention and he was back several months later. Hoid became employed as Waxillium Ladrian's new carriage driver. By that point he had become friendly with Wayne, who liked him but did not know anything about Hoid's true identity. When Wax headed to the precinct station to question Rian, Hoid drove the carriage and Wayne rode up front with him. During the carriage ride, Hoid eavesdropped on Wax's conversation with Harmony about Bleeder's plans to disrupt the Elendel Basin. Hoid's actions after this point are unclear. Hoid somehow obtained a coin-like unsealed metalmind containing a memory of Kelsier aiding the southern Scadrians in surviving the aftereffects of the Catacendre. He also spent some time in New Seran and following Nazh's theft of Nicki Savage's map of New Seran, Hoid asked her if she wanted to hear a story, an offer that she declined. He has also somehow come to the conclusion that he is the true owner of Kelesina Shores' mansion there, for somewhat legitimate but unknown reasons. He was apparently a regular intruder on the mansion grounds, to the irritation of the guards. During this time, Hoid took the appearance of a beggar with long, unkempt fingernails and a ragged shirt. Hoid appeared blind with milky white eyes. When Waxillium Ladrian walked up the path to Kelesina's mansion to attend a party with Steris Harms, Hoid climbed out of the bushes, startling Wax, although Wax did not recognise Hoid as his carriage driver through his disguise. Wanting to reveal Kelsier's resurrection and identity as the Sovereign, Hoid looked for an opportunity to pass on the unsealed metalmind. He asked Wax for a few clips. Steris noticed Hoid's cologne and asked him if he was wearing cologne. Hoid was startled by her observation and claimed that he had been drinking perfume, as it had quite a kick. Steris told him that that was unhealthy and Wax advised Hoid that he should leave the private grounds. Hoid agreed but claimed that it was his property and again asked for coins. Wax gave him a banknote and told him again to leave the grounds. Hoid claimed it was far too much and that he wished to give Waxillium change. As Wax walked away, Hoid threw the coin at Wax's head, who caught it in midair. A groundsman then noticed Hoid and tried to chase him off."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Post-Catacendric Scadrial', 'order': 38, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7b0ce9de-e821-4f7f-8be1-8464b4332640'}, page_content='Hoid - Hoid laughed and escaped back into the bushes again. Hoid later became involved in the sting operation that Marasi ran in Bilming in . He had a silent interaction with Moonlight from different trucks.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Post-Catacendric Scadrial', 'order': 38, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7b0ce9de-e821-4f7f-8be1-8464b4332640'}, page_content="Hoid - Moonlight commented that she couldn't tell whether she was watching Hoid or if Hoid was watching her, but then resolved that they were both just keeping an eye on the same third parties. After Wax arrived in Bilming, and gave chase to Dumad he casually appeared in a sleek black car to give Wax a ride. In Bilming, he traded his harmonica with Wayne for a rat named Sir Squeekins. Since this event, he has been taking good care of Sir Squeekins. He also showed up to rescue Wax from the ocean in a small boat after the explosion of the Pewternaut A16."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bet with the Sorceress of Lumar', 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4ffced7e-4b81-4dff-9d51-4380e31c98fc'}, page_content="Hoid -  Bet with the Sorceress of Lumar \nHoid would later go on to visit the planet of Lumar, a relative backwater in the cosmere. At some point he informed his friend, the kandra Ulaam, of his intentions to visit the planet via letter. Still hoping to gain access to AonDor, he met with Riina, who was living on the planet in the guise the Sorceress of the Midnight Sea. While visiting her island, Hoid agreed to a bet with her. Riina would be allowed to place him under a curse, and in exchange, if he could successfully break it, he would be granted admission to the Elantrians and the ability to use AonDor. The curse placed on him stripped him of his sense of humor, sense of style, sense of decorum, sense of purpose, intelligence, and sense of self. In order to break the curse, he would need to return to the central room of the Sorceress' ship on her island. As a part of the curse, he was also forbidden from telling anyone any information about his curse, how he had been given it, or how it could be broken. Riina finished her casting by sending Hoid far away from the Midnight Sea. During his time here, he likely came into possession of some Midnight spores. While under the effects of this curse, Hoid's behavior bore little resemblance to his normal personality. He dressed quite oddly, trying at times to wear every shade of orange he could find, or his red-sequined briefs."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bet with the Sorceress of Lumar', 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4ffced7e-4b81-4dff-9d51-4380e31c98fc'}, page_content="Hoid - He spent time doing things like inventing the card game Kings, in which you hold your cards backwards and can see everyone's hand but your own, an invention that lost him many of his possessions. Bad jokes and nonsensical ideas filled basically all his time, and he was only very rarely able to think clearly enough to communicate anything meaningful or work to accomplish his goals. He was left with some dim awareness of his situation though, a cruel decision on the part of Riina who wanted him aware enough to be horrified by his situation."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bet with the Sorceress of Lumar', 'order': 39, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4ffced7e-4b81-4dff-9d51-4380e31c98fc'}, page_content="Hoid - Any attempt to share information about his curse would only start him stuttering and send him back to his normal befuddled state. Hoid spent a long time at sea, wandering without apparent progress at breaking his curse. Ulaam eventually arrived on the planet and found Hoid, but was uninterested in working too hard to free him from his curse, preferring to simply stick close and wait for the problem to resolve itself. The two of them spent at least a year traveling together in this way. Eventually Hoid would become the cabin boy of the Whistlebow. He came into contact with Charlie, son of the duke of Diggen's Point and returned there to give Tress a ceramic cup and Charlie's first letter to her. Later, he was traded for by Fort for a large sum on the orders of Captain Crow who was interested in Hoid once she had heard that he had been cursed by the Sorceress. Hoid settled onto a routine onto the Crow's Song, working as a cabin boy there as well, and kept fed despite his near-uselessness by Fort. Ulaam continued as his companion, and the two were suffered by the crew despite their oddities, due in part to Ulaam's skill with medicine. During his time on the Crow's Song, Hoid gave midnight spores to Weev, the ship's sprouter, believing them to be licorice. Another of his shipmates, Tress, became interested in Hoid's past after Ulaam explained to her that Hoid had been cursed, and approached him on the deck of the ship to try to obtain information about the Sorcess despite his curse. Hoid was unable to say much of note, but he dimly realized she was trying to help him and was able to offer some cryptic clues, asking Tress to bring him to her planet so he could save her, meaning the map of Lumar present on the Sorceress's ship. He also told her to look for a grouping of six stars, a carving under her bed, which would lead her to Weev's secret supply of midnight aether. After Tress recovered the midnight aether, Ulaam confronted Hoid, asking if he had given the aether to her. Ulaam and Tress continued to press Hoid for information and he was able to tell them to look for a person that is not a person and could talk when they should not, which they realized referred to Charlie in his guise of Huck the rat. As the Crow's Song continued its journey into the Crimson Sea, Hoid continued to stymie Tress's attempts to wheedle more information out of him, unable to point at words on a sheet of paper that might be relevant to his curse. However, Tress realized that he she could glean information from his silences though, as he stopped speaking when the subject turned to the matter of his curse. This allowed him to indicate to her where Riina's island might be found on a map. As they traveled closer to the Midnight Sea, Huck convinced the addled Hoid to dump much of the ship's food and water overboard, in an unsuccessful attempt to force the crew to return the to Emerald Sea. Later when the Crow's Song reached the Sorceress's island, the ship's crew carried Hoid into the Sorceress's ship to save Tress and Huck, who had realized that bringing Hoid to the center of the Sorceress's power would break the curse, and hopefully allow him to defeat her. When Hoid entered the tower, the terms of the bet were fulfilled and he was restored to his sense and transformed into an Elantrian. Hoid arrived just in time to use AonDor to throw up a shield and prevent Riina from cursing Tress. In the brief confrontation that followed, Riina judged that she was not confident enough that she could defeat Hoid to risk a direct confrontation with him, instead choosing to flee the planet and let Hoid, Tress, and Charlie go free. While Hoid was unable to directly remove the curse on Charlie, he was able to tweak the parameters so that Charlie could break the curse himself once he returned to Diggen's Point with Tress. Hoid may have lingered with them for some time giving Charlie some pointers on storytelling and music. Hoid would later share his adventure with Tress and Charlie as a story to an unknown audience, potentially made up of people from the planet First of the Sun. It is unknown exactly when he tells this story relative to the events, but it is known to be within years or decades, but less than centuries."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Meeting with Sigzil on Canticle', 'order': 40, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '347b4e91-7da7-4a1a-af20-ee7c9400d517'}, page_content="Hoid -  Meeting with Sigzil on Canticle \nWhen Hoid's apprentice Sigzil arrived on Canticle, Sigzil's spren Auxiliary used some Investiture they had acquired to temporarily reinforce Sigzil's Connection to Hoid, allowing Hoid to appear before Sigzil as an illusion. Sigzil remained angry with Hoid for the betrayal, feeling as if he had been tricked and used by Wit when he was asked to take up the Dawnshard, and forced into his life of fleeing the Night Brigade. He confronted Hoid in anger for this and his betrayal in the warcamps."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Meeting with Sigzil on Canticle', 'order': 40, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '347b4e91-7da7-4a1a-af20-ee7c9400d517'}, page_content="Hoid - Hoid responded by explaining to Sigzil that he had taken him on as an apprentice due to his hunger for answers to all his questions. Hoid reminded Sigzil that while that it was a good instinct, it's important to realize that the questions are more important than the answers themselves sometimes. As the Connection faded, Hoid apologized sincerely to Sigzil for his mistake, and for ruining his life."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Frozen on Komashi', 'order': 41, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0fdcaad8-9b4a-4b4e-9a0e-aa4145f84555'}, page_content="Hoid -  Frozen on Komashi \n\nAt some point after Sigzil's overthrowing of the Cinder King, Hoid went with Design to Komashi and was almost instantly frozen in place, unable to move. This was due to the protection measures that he instituted to prevent other entities from interfering with his Investiture after recovering from Odium's destruction of his breaths."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Frozen on Komashi', 'order': 41, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0fdcaad8-9b4a-4b4e-9a0e-aa4145f84555'}, page_content='Hoid - It activated as, immediately upon his arrival, the father machine attempted to absorb his Investiture to power itself. Seeing his state, Design spraypainted him copper and used him as a coatrack in her new noodle shop, the Noodle Pupil. At some point following his stasis, he formed a Connection with Painter, Yumi, and Liyun allowing him to tell what they were doing, feeling, and thinking, along with many others on the planet, though he felt it with them particularly acutely, and knew it had something to do with him. After the father machine was destroyed by Yumi, and the attempts to absorb his Investiture thus halted, he was freed from his stasis. He planned with Design to disguise themselves as astronauts and steal a ship, allowing them to travel to the nearby Iron Seven Waystation. He kept in contact with Nikaro, Yumi, and Masaka, via letters and inquiries, allowing him to keep up with their lives and how society coped with the loss of the shroud. He would eventually tell the story of Yumi and Painter to an unknown audience on Roshar, with permission from those involved. It is possible that Hoid had been to Komashi at some point before the activation of the father machine, as he had some implied familiarity with some elements of Torish culture.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 42, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '40655c0d-a2ea-4077-8bd4-c50b36a3a992'}, page_content="Hoid -  Relationships \nDue to his nature as a worldhopper, Hoid has met most of the main characters in the cosmere, as well as a large quantity of side characters. The Shards \nHoid's relationships with the various Vessels are varied, to say the least, ranging from hate and terror to respect and cameraderie. Ati\n He considers Ati to once have been a kind and generous man before his Ascension, though he thinks very differently of what he became. Bavadin\n Hoid has a long-standing grudge against Bavadin for unknown reasons. She has instilled in many of her avatars, including the one on Obrodai, a deep dislike of him; however, he and Bavadin herself had a relationship at some point. Edgli\n Hoid and Edgli mutually detest each other. However, their conversations are far more polite than Hoid's relations with Bavadin or Rayse. Koravellium Avast\n Hoid, while not enemies with Koravellium, has never really gotten along with her. However, he recognizes the fact that she poses a threat to Odium, and respects that. Rayse\n Hoid was once friends with Rayse, though considered him to have always been a very loathsome, crafty, and dangerous individual. He is now terrified of the Shard, and takes many precautions against him. However, he is not above taunting the Shard, as he feels him to be the most detestable person he has ever met, albeit preferably from a position of superiority. Prior to Rayse's death, Hoid had not met the Shard in person for more than a thousand years. Sazed\n Sazed has a benevolent feeling towards Hoid. However, the latter has nevertheless hidden from the Shard whenever he visits Scadrial, a decision of which Sazed disapproves and questions, but by which he is also fascinated. He wishes to work with Hoid to keep Odium contained, as he is highly disturbed by the wound upon the Spiritual Realm where Ambition was Splintered. They disagree on whether it is the Vessel or the power that is more dangerous, with Sazed believing that the Investiture will make any Vessel of Odium the same as their predecessor, but they agree that it would be the combination of a Vessel's craftiness and the power's Intent that would be most fearsome--coincidentally, a very good description of Taravangian. Tanavast\n Hoid was acquainted with Tanavast before the Shattering."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 42, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '40655c0d-a2ea-4077-8bd4-c50b36a3a992'}, page_content="Hoid - Tanavast did like Hoid enough to buy him drinks once. Taravangian\n Prior to Taravangian's Ascension, Hoid had never notably interacted with him. However, after the occupation of Urithiru, when going to challenge Rayse, he realized that a new Vessel had Ascended, and was completely terrified, as Rayse was controlled by the power, but a new Vessel might have more control. However, Taravangian destroyed the Breaths holding his short-term memory, so he did not believe anything to be amiss. Valor \n Valor appears rather fond of Hoid, and believes it has been too long since their last conversation as of Harmony's letter. The exact nature of their relationship, and his feelings concerning her, are currently unknown. Cosmere-Wide \n Khrissalla\n Hoid thinks well of Khriss. Although it is unknown how much information she has shared with him, she knows far more about the cosmere than he, as she pursues the knowledge for the sake of scholarship, while he uses it to sound smart and achieve his goals. If he were to ask her about something that she knew, though, and she perceived that he was asking for a morally good reason, she would tell him. The Seventeenth Shard\n Hoid is quite dismissive of the Seventeenth Shard. Although they fear that his actions will exacerbate Shardic conflict due to their non-interventionist policy, he easily evades those whom they assign to pursue him. Frost\n Hoid and Frost know each other well, having worked together in the past, and have a method of communicating with one another besides the Silverlight Mercantile interplanetary postal service. Despite this, they are completely opposed on the courses of action that would be best for the cosmere. Frost, as a member of the Seventeenth Shard, believes that the best course of action is to let events play out as they will, especially in regard to Odium's growing power and ambition. However, as Hoid is a worldhopper and Frost is not, the former believes that he has a more informed stance, and plans to take more active action against the Shard. The Ghostbloods\n Hoid has a very different opinion of the Ghostbloods than he does of their leader, viewing them as generally not a threat. Wan ShaiLu\n It is unclear how he feels about Wan ShaiLu, despite him betraying her without hesitation in order to get his hands on the Moon Scepter. Wan ShaiLu, on the other hand, despises him for his betrayal. After escaping from the Rose Empire, she began to hunt after him to enact her revenge, an act that she eventually succeeded at."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 42, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '40655c0d-a2ea-4077-8bd4-c50b36a3a992'}, page_content="Hoid - Their current relationship is unclear, but she does wonder to herself if she was keeping watch over him, or he over her, but she knows that they are in reality just keeping watch over the same third parties. Nightblood\n Hoid is terrified of Nightblood and tries to stay very far away from it, as he believes that it has a chance of killing him. Riina\n He has a very hostile relationship with Riina, with her having cursed him to tastelessness and unintelligence. Ulaam\n\n He has a relatively amiable relationship with Ulaam, with the two considering each other friends. Though Ulaam does enjoy insulting and humiliating him, even recording what he said during his curse from Riina in order to embarrass him for years, and also has sent records to their mutual friends. Roshar \nIn his position as King's, and later, Queen's Wit, Hoid has had opportunities to interact with many notable Rosharans, and has taken full advantage of such chances. Design\n Hoid has a fondly exasperated view towards Design. Though, as a pair who share a Nahel bond, they are extremely close, he is consistently frustrated by her habit of spoiling stories that he's telling, as he sees it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 42, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '40655c0d-a2ea-4077-8bd4-c50b36a3a992'}, page_content="Hoid - Despite this amicable relationship, they are not the best for each other, exacerbate certain features of one another in a way that isn't good for either of them. Jasnah\n Hoid is romantically involved with Jasnah. He also has immense respect for her, both due to her sheer intelligence and the fact that, when all else fails, she is, above all, paranoid. Jasnah notes that he seems to think such things as kissing her safehand would spark passion in her, though it is her view that mental stimulation is far superior. Kaladin\n Hoid feels paternally to Kaladin. In such situations as when Kaladin is terrified at the discovery of his Radiant powers, languishing in prison, or trapped in a vision concocted by Odium and Moash in order to try and break him, Hoid is always there with a story to bring him back from the brink, and at one point gave Kaladin his Trailman's flute. Senne Khald \n Hoid took Senne Khald as his apprentice in the Sixth Epoch. Though his exact relationship with her is unclear. Shallan Davar\n Hoid feels similarly to Shallan as he does to Kaladin. Visiting her in times of need, such as when her father is growing more and more abusive or when she's sitting in a dark building in Kholinar, racked with guilt about Grund's death, he guides her to a path of self-forgiveness. Sigzil\n Hoid's relationship with Sigzil seems similar to that of Jasnah and Shallan. When in Azir, Hoid found Sigzil to be in some sort of trouble, and, after rescuing him, took the young Azish man under his wing and began teaching him as a Worldsinger. The two traveled Roshar together, at one point ending up in Babatharnam, where Hoid had to pay for Sigzil to be freed three separate times, though Sigzil suspected that they mainly arrested him because Hoid had a lot of money. Hoid graduated him as a full Worldsinger in . Hoid feels shame for how he effected Sigzil by giving him the Dawnshard, and for abandoning him to slavery. For a while, Sigzil believed that Hoid thought him dead, but was filled with rage upon learning that he knew he was alive all through his slavery at the Shattered Plains. He is further angered by the burden placed upon him by Hoid giving him the Dawnshard. Torol Sadeas\nHoid dislikes Sadeas, insulting him at any chance he gets. Though at first he tries to get Sadeas to attempt to kill him in order to remove the man as a threat, he makes fun of Sadeas after his death just for the fun of it. Scadrial \n Kelsier\n Kelsier and Hoid mutually detest one another. Hoid considers him extremely dangerous, though he doesn't think much of his organization. However, this doesn't stop him from taking action against the Cognitive Shadow, such as when he gives Wax a coppermind containing knowledge that Kelsier would have preferred to have stayed hidden. Wax\n He seems to think positively of Wax, acting as his coachman and helping him on multiple occasions, such as giving him a coppermind containing information on Kelsier, and saving him from the ocean after the destruction of the Pewternaut. Wayne\n He has a rather cordial relationship with Wayne, although he finds him bizarre. He once tried to convince Wayne to stop being so hard on himself and accept that he is a good person. Wayne also likes Hoid, and enjoys talking with him, though he doesn't know his true identity. While relatively cordial, Hoid does seem to get annoyed by his kleptomania. Even though he wanted his harmonica back, he did ultimately accept Wayne's trade of it for a rat. Joshin Yomen and Lady Mi'chelle Ostlin\n He is good friends with Joshin Yomen and Lady Mi'chelle Ostlin, with their wedding being a big part of why he returned to Scadrial, wanting to come to congratulate his friends. Lumar \n Tress \n He holds enough respect for Tress and her adventure that he sees her as very mature and talented for her age, and he remembered her adventure and told the tale years to decades after they parted. Though he still felt that she didn't have the right to give him commands, but ultimately obliged due to her being his captain. He has kept tabs on her and the rest of the crew of the Crow's Song for several years after his curse was broken. Tress knew Hoid as a cabin boy on Diggen's Point, and a member of the Crow's Song. Though, for much of their relationship, she held little respect for him due to the effects of the curse Riina put on him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 42, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '40655c0d-a2ea-4077-8bd4-c50b36a3a992'}, page_content='Hoid - She eventually came to see him as a means to an end for finding Charlie. Her opinion on him greatly changed after he saved her from Riina after his curse was broken, though she still viewed him as a member of her crew and thus under her command.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Shards', 'order': 43, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'acaa98d7-7f15-4c06-a0e0-716dc4fe99ef'}, page_content="Hoid -  The Shards \nHoid's relationships with the various Vessels are varied, to say the least, ranging from hate and terror to respect and cameraderie. Ati\n He considers Ati to once have been a kind and generous man before his Ascension, though he thinks very differently of what he became."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Shards', 'order': 43, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'acaa98d7-7f15-4c06-a0e0-716dc4fe99ef'}, page_content="Hoid - Bavadin\n Hoid has a long-standing grudge against Bavadin for unknown reasons. She has instilled in many of her avatars, including the one on Obrodai, a deep dislike of him; however, he and Bavadin herself had a relationship at some point. Edgli\n Hoid and Edgli mutually detest each other. However, their conversations are far more polite than Hoid's relations with Bavadin or Rayse. Koravellium Avast\n Hoid, while not enemies with Koravellium, has never really gotten along with her. However, he recognizes the fact that she poses a threat to Odium, and respects that. Rayse\n Hoid was once friends with Rayse, though considered him to have always been a very loathsome, crafty, and dangerous individual. He is now terrified of the Shard, and takes many precautions against him. However, he is not above taunting the Shard, as he feels him to be the most detestable person he has ever met, albeit preferably from a position of superiority. Prior to Rayse's death, Hoid had not met the Shard in person for more than a thousand years. Sazed\n Sazed has a benevolent feeling towards Hoid. However, the latter has nevertheless hidden from the Shard whenever he visits Scadrial, a decision of which Sazed disapproves and questions, but by which he is also fascinated. He wishes to work with Hoid to keep Odium contained, as he is highly disturbed by the wound upon the Spiritual Realm where Ambition was Splintered. They disagree on whether it is the Vessel or the power that is more dangerous, with Sazed believing that the Investiture will make any Vessel of Odium the same as their predecessor, but they agree that it would be the combination of a Vessel's craftiness and the power's Intent that would be most fearsome--coincidentally, a very good description of Taravangian. Tanavast\n Hoid was acquainted with Tanavast before the Shattering."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Shards', 'order': 43, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'acaa98d7-7f15-4c06-a0e0-716dc4fe99ef'}, page_content="Hoid - Tanavast did like Hoid enough to buy him drinks once. Taravangian\n Prior to Taravangian's Ascension, Hoid had never notably interacted with him. However, after the occupation of Urithiru, when going to challenge Rayse, he realized that a new Vessel had Ascended, and was completely terrified, as Rayse was controlled by the power, but a new Vessel might have more control. However, Taravangian destroyed the Breaths holding his short-term memory, so he did not believe anything to be amiss. Valor \n Valor appears rather fond of Hoid, and believes it has been too long since their last conversation as of Harmony's letter. The exact nature of their relationship, and his feelings concerning her, are currently unknown."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cosmere-Wide', 'order': 44, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ca4e6f13-e779-4c3f-87ef-7c44a0d0c0fc'}, page_content="Hoid -  Cosmere-Wide \n Khrissalla\n Hoid thinks well of Khriss. Although it is unknown how much information she has shared with him, she knows far more about the cosmere than he, as she pursues the knowledge for the sake of scholarship, while he uses it to sound smart and achieve his goals. If he were to ask her about something that she knew, though, and she perceived that he was asking for a morally good reason, she would tell him. The Seventeenth Shard\n Hoid is quite dismissive of the Seventeenth Shard. Although they fear that his actions will exacerbate Shardic conflict due to their non-interventionist policy, he easily evades those whom they assign to pursue him. Frost\n Hoid and Frost know each other well, having worked together in the past, and have a method of communicating with one another besides the Silverlight Mercantile interplanetary postal service. Despite this, they are completely opposed on the courses of action that would be best for the cosmere. Frost, as a member of the Seventeenth Shard, believes that the best course of action is to let events play out as they will, especially in regard to Odium's growing power and ambition. However, as Hoid is a worldhopper and Frost is not, the former believes that he has a more informed stance, and plans to take more active action against the Shard. The Ghostbloods\n Hoid has a very different opinion of the Ghostbloods than he does of their leader, viewing them as generally not a threat. Wan ShaiLu\n It is unclear how he feels about Wan ShaiLu, despite him betraying her without hesitation in order to get his hands on the Moon Scepter. Wan ShaiLu, on the other hand, despises him for his betrayal. After escaping from the Rose Empire, she began to hunt after him to enact her revenge, an act that she eventually succeeded at."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cosmere-Wide', 'order': 44, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ca4e6f13-e779-4c3f-87ef-7c44a0d0c0fc'}, page_content='Hoid - Their current relationship is unclear, but she does wonder to herself if she was keeping watch over him, or he over her, but she knows that they are in reality just keeping watch over the same third parties. Nightblood\n Hoid is terrified of Nightblood and tries to stay very far away from it, as he believes that it has a chance of killing him. Riina\n He has a very hostile relationship with Riina, with her having cursed him to tastelessness and unintelligence. Ulaam\n\n He has a relatively amiable relationship with Ulaam, with the two considering each other friends. Though Ulaam does enjoy insulting and humiliating him, even recording what he said during his curse from Riina in order to embarrass him for years, and also has sent records to their mutual friends.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Roshar', 'order': 45, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ce77d18d-e012-4845-a57d-92a851b7908c'}, page_content="Hoid -  Roshar \nIn his position as King's, and later, Queen's Wit, Hoid has had opportunities to interact with many notable Rosharans, and has taken full advantage of such chances. Design\n Hoid has a fondly exasperated view towards Design. Though, as a pair who share a Nahel bond, they are extremely close, he is consistently frustrated by her habit of spoiling stories that he's telling, as he sees it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Roshar', 'order': 45, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ce77d18d-e012-4845-a57d-92a851b7908c'}, page_content="Hoid - Despite this amicable relationship, they are not the best for each other, exacerbate certain features of one another in a way that isn't good for either of them. Jasnah\n Hoid is romantically involved with Jasnah. He also has immense respect for her, both due to her sheer intelligence and the fact that, when all else fails, she is, above all, paranoid. Jasnah notes that he seems to think such things as kissing her safehand would spark passion in her, though it is her view that mental stimulation is far superior. Kaladin\n Hoid feels paternally to Kaladin. In such situations as when Kaladin is terrified at the discovery of his Radiant powers, languishing in prison, or trapped in a vision concocted by Odium and Moash in order to try and break him, Hoid is always there with a story to bring him back from the brink, and at one point gave Kaladin his Trailman's flute. Senne Khald \n Hoid took Senne Khald as his apprentice in the Sixth Epoch. Though his exact relationship with her is unclear. Shallan Davar\n Hoid feels similarly to Shallan as he does to Kaladin. Visiting her in times of need, such as when her father is growing more and more abusive or when she's sitting in a dark building in Kholinar, racked with guilt about Grund's death, he guides her to a path of self-forgiveness. Sigzil\n Hoid's relationship with Sigzil seems similar to that of Jasnah and Shallan. When in Azir, Hoid found Sigzil to be in some sort of trouble, and, after rescuing him, took the young Azish man under his wing and began teaching him as a Worldsinger. The two traveled Roshar together, at one point ending up in Babatharnam, where Hoid had to pay for Sigzil to be freed three separate times, though Sigzil suspected that they mainly arrested him because Hoid had a lot of money. Hoid graduated him as a full Worldsinger in . Hoid feels shame for how he effected Sigzil by giving him the Dawnshard, and for abandoning him to slavery. For a while, Sigzil believed that Hoid thought him dead, but was filled with rage upon learning that he knew he was alive all through his slavery at the Shattered Plains. He is further angered by the burden placed upon him by Hoid giving him the Dawnshard. Torol Sadeas\nHoid dislikes Sadeas, insulting him at any chance he gets. Though at first he tries to get Sadeas to attempt to kill him in order to remove the man as a threat, he makes fun of Sadeas after his death just for the fun of it."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Scadrial', 'order': 46, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '19986958-aece-4661-8d56-8c72e02611a1'}, page_content="Hoid -  Scadrial \n Kelsier\n Kelsier and Hoid mutually detest one another. Hoid considers him extremely dangerous, though he doesn't think much of his organization. However, this doesn't stop him from taking action against the Cognitive Shadow, such as when he gives Wax a coppermind containing knowledge that Kelsier would have preferred to have stayed hidden. Wax\n He seems to think positively of Wax, acting as his coachman and helping him on multiple occasions, such as giving him a coppermind containing information on Kelsier, and saving him from the ocean after the destruction of the Pewternaut. Wayne\n He has a rather cordial relationship with Wayne, although he finds him bizarre."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Scadrial', 'order': 46, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '19986958-aece-4661-8d56-8c72e02611a1'}, page_content="Hoid - He once tried to convince Wayne to stop being so hard on himself and accept that he is a good person. Wayne also likes Hoid, and enjoys talking with him, though he doesn't know his true identity. While relatively cordial, Hoid does seem to get annoyed by his kleptomania. Even though he wanted his harmonica back, he did ultimately accept Wayne's trade of it for a rat. Joshin Yomen and Lady Mi'chelle Ostlin\n He is good friends with Joshin Yomen and Lady Mi'chelle Ostlin, with their wedding being a big part of why he returned to Scadrial, wanting to come to congratulate his friends."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Lumar', 'order': 47, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '437ad55e-92b4-409a-b358-30d6c3eb8a38'}, page_content="Hoid -  Lumar \n Tress \n He holds enough respect for Tress and her adventure that he sees her as very mature and talented for her age, and he remembered her adventure and told the tale years to decades after they parted. Though he still felt that she didn't have the right to give him commands, but ultimately obliged due to her being his captain. He has kept tabs on her and the rest of the crew of the Crow's Song for several years after his curse was broken. Tress knew Hoid as a cabin boy on Diggen's Point, and a member of the Crow's Song. Though, for much of their relationship, she held little respect for him due to the effects of the curse Riina put on him."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Lumar', 'order': 47, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '437ad55e-92b4-409a-b358-30d6c3eb8a38'}, page_content='Hoid - She eventually came to see him as a means to an end for finding Charlie. Her opinion on him greatly changed after he saved her from Riina after his curse was broken, though she still viewed him as a member of her crew and thus under her command.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Known Aliases', 'order': 48, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5b985e35-3082-40b0-bdcc-32df05913333'}, page_content='Hoid -  Known Aliases '), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Speculation', 'order': 49, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0b136ac8-ab76-4358-9687-ea54b93a85b4'}, page_content='Hoid -  Speculation \n Worldsingers & Worldbringers \nThe names of the Worldsingers, a group of storytellers on Roshar, and the Conclave of Worldbringers, the leading body of the original Terris religion, are strikingly similar. Brandon has stated that this is not a coincidence.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Speculation', 'order': 49, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0b136ac8-ab76-4358-9687-ea54b93a85b4'}, page_content='Hoid - Some believe that Hoid is a common root to both of these organizations, one of which, the Worldbringers, was very Realmatically aware. In addition to this he is known to be a founder of the Worldsingers and a member of the Worldbringers.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldsingers & Worldbringers', 'order': 50, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '24d44399-fbd9-4165-bc48-bb28a9d8a57c'}, page_content='Hoid -  Worldsingers & Worldbringers \nThe names of the Worldsingers, a group of storytellers on Roshar, and the Conclave of Worldbringers, the leading body of the original Terris religion, are strikingly similar. Brandon has stated that this is not a coincidence.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Worldsingers & Worldbringers', 'order': 50, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '24d44399-fbd9-4165-bc48-bb28a9d8a57c'}, page_content='Hoid - Some believe that Hoid is a common root to both of these organizations, one of which, the Worldbringers, was very Realmatically aware. In addition to this he is known to be a founder of the Worldsingers and a member of the Worldbringers.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Quotes', 'order': 51, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8f2ce9cf-bbf7-4875-ba10-5043776cca10'}, page_content='Hoid -  Quotes '), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 52, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6499dcfd-221b-4899-9fa7-3ab7d3a5673c'}, page_content='Hoid -  Trivia \n The character of Hoid existed before the concept of Adonalsium was developed. He first appeared in a short story Brandon wrote long ago, going by the name Kamp. He was on a planet trying to figure out how the magical system of the area worked. Brandon has stated that Hoid is one of his favorite characters, alongside Dalinar, by the virtue of being one of the oldest. Brandon may eventually write a parallel novel to the Mistborn series that chronicles what Hoid was up to behind the scenes. In 2018, Brandon did a reading of an uncanonical scene he had written several years prior, called "The Traveler." In it, two men, likely Hoid and Frost, have a conversation shortly after the deaths of Leras and Ati. A recording and a transcription of the reading can be found here. Hoid, under the name Topaz, was Brandon\'s first Dungeons & Dragons character. Brandon does not believe he would aid Hoid\'s cause if he were in the cosmere. Hoid fears the Beyond. He has a good opinion of Khriss, and they have met at least once. Hoid has spoken with the Nightwatcher. For several books, Hoid\'s best friend was somebody named Bat\'Chor. This may no longer be the case as of Mistborn Era 2. Hoid has had a romantic interest in the past. In fact, there were several.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 52, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6499dcfd-221b-4899-9fa7-3ab7d3a5673c'}, page_content='Hoid - He is the happiest when "getting away with something".'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 52, 'parent_article': 'Hoid', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6499dcfd-221b-4899-9fa7-3ab7d3a5673c'}, page_content='Hoid - When asked in what published book that was, Brandon responded with The Bands of Mourning. Hoid\'s quest may be "To make that which once was."\n Hoid is unimpressed with the Ghostbloods. Hoid loathes the Set, and the members who know of him loathe him in return. Though he once (extremely accurately) said to Kaladin that he began life as words on a page, this was not in fact a break of the fourth wall. He has dressed in drag before, "multiple times."\n Prior to the events of Words of Radiance, Hoid had not been hugged in "a long time."\n His favorite type of spren is a Cryptic. Hoid does not pay taxes. Hoid\'s favorite color is black. Hoid loves bacon. Hoid likes milkshakes. Hoid is interested in having a nose that can\'t smell cheese. Hoid is a fan of ramen. and co-owned a restaurant called the Noodle Pupil on Komashi with Design before Design gave it away to Yumi and Nikaro.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Odium', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ce27f4f5-3c6b-4626-a8f8-702f05ef18df'}, page_content="Odium - <disable-google-snippet /> \n\nOdium is the Shard of Adonalsium , and currently held by Taravangian. Unlike most other Shards, which typically pick a single world and settle there, Odium has been traveling freely throughout the cosmere for a long time, deliberately refusing to Invest himself anywhere. He is responsible for the deaths of at least four Shards -- Ambition, Devotion, Dominion, and Honor. In the present, he's confined to the planet Braize, but his influence can be felt on the entire Rosharan system."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Odium', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ce27f4f5-3c6b-4626-a8f8-702f05ef18df'}, page_content='Odium - Odium’s Investiture is typically associated with “burning” gold or violet-black colors, though it is also often red, the color that signifies corrupted Investiture. His overall motif is red-gold, although gold is his "real" color.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Intent', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c9ba465d-8941-499a-8591-74104d0acb3e'}, page_content='Odium -  Intent \n\nThe Shard of Odium is even harder to control than Ruin. The word "odium" means the state or fact of being subjected to hatred and contempt as a result of a despicable act. However, interpretation of the Shard\'s intent is not as simple.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Intent', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c9ba465d-8941-499a-8591-74104d0acb3e'}, page_content="Odium - Frost claims a straightforward definition: that it is God's own divine hatred. Rayse himself, however, claims that he's Passion, a Shard of emotions, in particular excessive emotions. Upon Ascension, Taravangian grappled with the vicious urge to destroy and burn. Many of his splinters, the Unmade compel people to give in to powerful sensations - Ashertmarn compels people to revel mindlessly, and Nergaoul inspires exultation in battle. On the other hand, the overwhelming amount of emotions inspired by Odium are hateful, among them the aforementioned Thrill and the Rhythms of Odium-derived singer forms. Moreover, Odium's influence sometimes promotes apathy rather than passion, as his followers are encouraged to give up their pain and sense of guilt. Odium likes questions and arguments, which conflicts with Rayse's own hatred of being questioned. Rayse has a tendency towards self-deception, and apart from him, everyone understands Odium as being the Shard of hatred. While it's possible for a Vessel to influence a Shard to an extent, Odium's declaration of being Passion should not be taken at face value. It has been noted that while Odium claims to be Passion, that passions other than hatred, such as love, are absent from the emotions inspired in his followers. Apart from the issue of the Shard's nature, Rayse desired to become the sole god of the cosmere. Whether this is due to the Vessel or the Shard is unknown."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Associated Magics', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9d5f029e-5569-46e9-a994-737727125a8f'}, page_content='Odium -  Associated Magics \n Voidlight \n\nVoidlight is the gaseous form of Odium\'s Investiture, analogous to Honor\'s Stormlight. Unlike Stormlight, however, Voidlight\'s applications are far more narrow. It can be utilized by the Fused to provide healing and fuel their use of Surges, and it might have some relation to the forms of power used by the Regals. It has applications in fabrial technology created via the process of corrupting spren and then trapping them within an appropriate gemstone housing, similar to normal fabrials. A singer can sing the Song of Prayer to obtain Voidlight, though this would draw Odium\'s attention and appears to have certain limitations. In the past, it was also provided by Ba-Ado-Mishram, and possibly through other means. Voidlight can be combined with Stormlight via the use of the Rhythm of War, binding them into a form of light called "Warlight" that has a dark blue-white appearance. Raysium \n\nRaysium is a God Metal, a physical form of Odium\'s raw power. It is gold-white in color and its ability to conduct Investiture has many applications in fabrial technology. Voidbinding \n\nThe Rosharan magic system associated with Odium is Voidbinding. Very little is known about it at the moment, including the specific powers it grants or the method of acquiring the ability to Voidbind.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Associated Magics', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9d5f029e-5569-46e9-a994-737727125a8f'}, page_content='Odium - What is known is that there are ten levels to it, and that it involves something called the Voidbindings, which might be the name of individual powers, analogous to Surges. It is highly likely that predicting the future is one of those powers. Spren \nDespite his reservations about Investing into a planet, Odium has created numerous spren in the Rosharan system, known collectively as Voidspren.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Associated Magics', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9d5f029e-5569-46e9-a994-737727125a8f'}, page_content='Odium - Some of them are intelligent, and capable of autonomous thought in the Physical Realm despite not being bonded to a living creature, in contrast to most spren of Honor or Cultivation. Others are as mindless as ordinary emotion or nature spren. Singers can bond the latter to become Regals, taking the spren into their gemhearts to gain forms with supernatural abilities ranging from speaking all languages, to summoning lightning. Standing apart from regular voidspren are the Unmade, a group of nine great Splinters of Odium, each granted immense power. Their abilities vary from Unmade to Unmade--some are capable of influencing human minds, some can grant powers to other creatures, and others have the ability to change spren. Likewise, their levels of intelligence vary; while Sja-anat is almost human-like, Nergaoul behaves more like a blind force of nature or animal. Fused \n\nFused are Cognitive Shadows of singers bound to Odium. This grants them numerous benefits, chief among them the ability of resurrection by taking over the bodies of their living kinsmen. During the True Desolation, this can occur when the Everstorm passes over singers who have been mentally primed to let something into their gemhearts. How this bonding happened before the Everstorm existed is unknown. Odium is able to take away their immortality. The Fused can use Voidlight to heal themselves, as well to fuel their use of Surges. Unlike Knights Radiant, the Fused have access to only one Surge each. However, Lady Leshwi claims that the Fused are more skilled with their Surge, due to the Fused being more internally focused, while the Radiants are more externally focused. Passions \n\nBy Connecting with someone, Odium is able to take away their negative emotions and passions, including fear, anger, pain, and insecurities. When negative emotions arise, they are quickly sucked away by Odium, leaving the person feeling nothing. This Connection can be disrupted, allowing the person to feel their pain in full.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Voidlight', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '898b8be8-c0e6-48a4-809c-2abc64a08009'}, page_content="Odium -  Voidlight \n\nVoidlight is the gaseous form of Odium's Investiture, analogous to Honor's Stormlight. Unlike Stormlight, however, Voidlight's applications are far more narrow."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Voidlight', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '898b8be8-c0e6-48a4-809c-2abc64a08009'}, page_content='Odium - It can be utilized by the Fused to provide healing and fuel their use of Surges, and it might have some relation to the forms of power used by the Regals. It has applications in fabrial technology created via the process of corrupting spren and then trapping them within an appropriate gemstone housing, similar to normal fabrials. A singer can sing the Song of Prayer to obtain Voidlight, though this would draw Odium\'s attention and appears to have certain limitations. In the past, it was also provided by Ba-Ado-Mishram, and possibly through other means. Voidlight can be combined with Stormlight via the use of the Rhythm of War, binding them into a form of light called "Warlight" that has a dark blue-white appearance.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Raysium', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'daf0e4b0-f487-4ed1-8d61-a9405dd43324'}, page_content="Odium -  Raysium \n\nRaysium is a God Metal, a physical form of Odium's raw power. It is gold-white in color and its ability to conduct Investiture has many applications in fabrial technology."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Voidbinding', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f73cf178-7b2d-454d-a7f3-2302fc9b6edf'}, page_content='Odium -  Voidbinding \n\nThe Rosharan magic system associated with Odium is Voidbinding. Very little is known about it at the moment, including the specific powers it grants or the method of acquiring the ability to Voidbind.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Voidbinding', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f73cf178-7b2d-454d-a7f3-2302fc9b6edf'}, page_content='Odium - What is known is that there are ten levels to it, and that it involves something called the Voidbindings, which might be the name of individual powers, analogous to Surges. It is highly likely that predicting the future is one of those powers.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Spren', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5952ac28-434d-4e15-8270-97953693f47c'}, page_content='Odium -  Spren \nDespite his reservations about Investing into a planet, Odium has created numerous spren in the Rosharan system, known collectively as Voidspren. Some of them are intelligent, and capable of autonomous thought in the Physical Realm despite not being bonded to a living creature, in contrast to most spren of Honor or Cultivation.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Spren', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5952ac28-434d-4e15-8270-97953693f47c'}, page_content='Odium - Others are as mindless as ordinary emotion or nature spren. Singers can bond the latter to become Regals, taking the spren into their gemhearts to gain forms with supernatural abilities ranging from speaking all languages, to summoning lightning. Standing apart from regular voidspren are the Unmade, a group of nine great Splinters of Odium, each granted immense power. Their abilities vary from Unmade to Unmade--some are capable of influencing human minds, some can grant powers to other creatures, and others have the ability to change spren. Likewise, their levels of intelligence vary; while Sja-anat is almost human-like, Nergaoul behaves more like a blind force of nature or animal.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Fused', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ecf39ba8-4065-47c2-8f61-0d65977796b8'}, page_content='Odium -  Fused \n\nFused are Cognitive Shadows of singers bound to Odium. This grants them numerous benefits, chief among them the ability of resurrection by taking over the bodies of their living kinsmen. During the True Desolation, this can occur when the Everstorm passes over singers who have been mentally primed to let something into their gemhearts. How this bonding happened before the Everstorm existed is unknown.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Fused', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ecf39ba8-4065-47c2-8f61-0d65977796b8'}, page_content='Odium - Odium is able to take away their immortality. The Fused can use Voidlight to heal themselves, as well to fuel their use of Surges. Unlike Knights Radiant, the Fused have access to only one Surge each. However, Lady Leshwi claims that the Fused are more skilled with their Surge, due to the Fused being more internally focused, while the Radiants are more externally focused.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Passions', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '009dea11-27b8-4a83-bfbd-32c60ada0823'}, page_content='Odium -  Passions \n\nBy Connecting with someone, Odium is able to take away their negative emotions and passions, including fear, anger, pain, and insecurities. When negative emotions arise, they are quickly sucked away by Odium, leaving the person feeling nothing.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Passions', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '009dea11-27b8-4a83-bfbd-32c60ada0823'}, page_content='Odium - This Connection can be disrupted, allowing the person to feel their pain in full.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '56b30dd9-9db2-4c03-a8b4-708838421c18'}, page_content='Odium -  History \n\n Ancient History \n Creation and initial killings \nOdium was created at the Shattering, around ten-thousand years before the True Desolation,\n when the creator god, Adonalsium, was killed by sixteen people, splitting it into sixteen Shards. One of those killers was Rayse, who chose for himself the Shard of Odium. At some point after Ascending, Odium went after one of his fellow Shards, Ambition, as he felt most threatened by her intent. However, before he could find her, he located two other Shards, Devotion and Dominion, in the Selish system. Because they had settled together, Odium attacked them, since he could argue that they were breaking the agreement the Vessels made about not being in the same system as another Shard. Through means unknown, Odium killed and Splintered them both. To prevent their remaining power from gaining intelligence of its own, he then pulled it out of the Spiritual Realm and into the Cognitive, creating the Dor and causing Sel\'s magic systems to become location-dependent. He wasn\'t very experienced at the time, and his countermeasure failed as the Dor did, indeed, begin to gain a measure of sentience. After creating the Dor, Odium went on to the Threnodite system, where he found and attacked his initial target, Ambition. During the fight, Ambition was dealt a grievous wound, and chunks of her power were flung across the system. Ambition managed to flee the system, but was still Splintered in a fight with Odium. The Shard Mercy was also involved in at least one battle with Ambition and Odium. These clashes resulted in a wound in the Spiritual Realm and had "disturbing" effects that "twisted" the planet Threnody and its inhabitants. Although Odium was successful in these initial conflicts, he was weakened and severely wounded by them. Battle with Honor \nNext, over seven-thousand Rosharan years before the True Desolation, Odium set out for Rosharan system, seeking to kill either Honor, Cultivation, or both According to the Eila Stele, he was brought by the humans from another world, and the singers considered him a human god. It can be assumed that Odium was crucial in the breakdown of the relations between the two species. Eventually, for unknown reasons, a swap occurred, whereupon singers came to worship Odium while humans began serving Honor and Cultivation. Both sides created their own immortal armies - Odium, the Fused, and Honor, the Heralds. Honor fought Odium with assistance from Cultivation, and the two bound him to one of the system\'s planets, Braize, and somehow also prevented him from acting directly against most individuals on Roshar. Honor additionally crafted the Oathpact, which would use the Heralds to imprison Odium\'s forces on Braize along with their master. However, Odium was a much better fighter, and Honor was killed, though he inflicted a deep wound on Odium. Preparations \nKilling Honor did not free Odium from Braize, and the sacrifice of the Herald Taln meant that he could not send his armies to Roshar. And so, for the next four and a half thousand years, he prepared for the time when Taln would break, allowing for one last Desolation -- the True Desolation. Odium, though severely limited by Honor\'s actions, was nonetheless active. He also kept a limited awareness of what was going on all across the cosmere, and was aware that Ruin and Preservation had combined to become Harmony in Scadrian Year , over three-hundred years before the True Desolation. The idea of someone taking up two Shards at once, and finding harmony between them, terrified him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '56b30dd9-9db2-4c03-a8b4-708838421c18'}, page_content='Odium - He therefore began formulating a plan to eliminate this threat after being freed from the Rosharan System. As one of his Unmade, Nergaoul, was still free, Odium sent him to Alethkar to facilitate the Thrill among the Alethi. Over the centuries, the battle-rage brought about by Nergaoul became normal, and even desirable to the Alethi men; this developed affinity allowed Odium to control them using the Thrill. Moreover, the Thrill allowed Odium to groom a champion whom he could later put in command of his armies and use to release himself. In the final decades of the Era of Solitude, such a potential champion appeared in the form of Dalinar Kholin. Odium focused on him to ensure he had as many hooks in him as possible.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '56b30dd9-9db2-4c03-a8b4-708838421c18'}, page_content="Odium - Odium also focused on the listeners, a group of singers that had denied him some centuries prior. On the day of a treaty between them and the Alethi, Odium used one of his voidspren to lead them to buy an assassin, Szeth, who was used when Eshonai found out that the Alethi king, Gavilar Kholin, intended to release the very gods the listeners had once fled. Whether Gavilar's plan was inspired by Odium or not, it pushed the listeners to assassinate him, leading to the War of Reckoning. The War brought tremendous losses to the listeners, until the idea of assuming the old forms of power grew appealing to them. Through Ulim, Odium persuaded the listeners to assume stormform and summon the Everstorm, beginning the True Desolation. True Desolation \n Preparing a champion \nAs the True Desolation began and the Fused started taking over human territory, Odium focused on Dalinar Kholin while maneuvering his forces towards Thaylen City, where the confrontation between the two sides would occur. He penetrated one of Dalinar's visions and let him believe that Odium was the Almighty for a short while before revealing himself. Although Dalinar refused to release him, Odium was certain that Dalinar would eventually do so, and showed him his true form when Dalinar began to get too comfortable. He did not, however, agree to the contest of champions Dalinar suggested. Odium also interacted with Venli. He stopped the Fused from taking her body and granted her envoyform instead to spread his propaganda among the newly awakened singers. When she didn't work hard enough to his satisfaction, he tortured and threatened her, causing Venli to reconsider her current allegiance further. Dalinar and Odium spoke once more in a different vision, after Dalinar attempted to negotiate with Venli. Odium initially attempted to tear the vision apart, although Dalinar managed to send Venli out of it before that could happen. Odium then appeared to Dalinar and scolded him for thinking that any sort of accord between the two races was possible, before reassuring Dalinar that peace would, indeed, happen -- after Roshar was destroyed. Battle of Thaylen Field \n\nOdium decided to lead his forces on Thaylen City personally, although he didn't intend to use the plain singers in battle. He first sent a pair of thunderclasts, one to destroy the city walls, and the other to get to the Thaylen Gemstone Reserve, along with Fused to ensure that the King's Drop wouldn't fall into the wrong hands. Then, Odium used Nergaoul and the Alethi dependence on the Thrill to possess the Sadeas princedom forces in the city and make them turn against their own allies. Odium then went, taking with him Venli and several other Fused, to confront Dalinar in front of the city. Dalinar once more repeated his demand for the contest of champions, and this time, Odium agreed, before revealing that his champion would be Dalinar himself. By reminding Dalinar of his past crimes, chief among them the murder of his wife, Evi, Odium attempted to persuade Dalinar to surrender his guilt and accept that it was all Odium's fault. However, though Dalinar was initially horrified, he refused to give in. Odium could only watch, speechless, as Dalinar's newfound resolve allowed him to swear the Third Ideal of the Bondsmiths and open Honor's Perpendicularity. This development horrified Odium, especially when he recognized whatever Dalinar became at this moment. Realizing that he lost his trump card -- and that Dalinar could now push him into a real contest of champions -- Odium swiftly retreated from the field, leaving his armies to lose the battle. Deal with Taravangian \nKing Taravangian of Kharbranth had been planning to strike a deal with Odium for some time, as neither he nor his Diagram believed that defeating a god would be plausible. As such, he found a way to communicate with the Shard, both by writing and through actions such as opening the Kholinar Oathgate to let the Voidbringers invade Urithiru. Some time after the Battle of Thaylen Field, Odium obliged him, visiting him in Urithiru after Taravangian let him in by opening a window. Odium revealed that he knew perfectly well that Taravangian had both brilliant and less intelligent days, and deliberately visited on one of the latter, to make sure that Taravangian knew he had nothing to negotiate with. Though Odium praised the Diagram, he used it to show how much further his own future sight reached. This inadvertently let Taravangian know that Odium was unable to perceive anything involving Renarin Kholin. By reading the Diagram, Taravangian eventually managed to negotiate with Odium, though his initial offering of sparing anyone Taravangian ruled was discarded, with Odium pointing out that Taravangian sought to become the king of the whole of Roshar. Eventually, the two settled on sparing the citizens of Kharbranth and their spouses. Contest of Champions \nA year later, Odium brought Dalinar into a vision and agreed to set the terms of their contest. Although Odium's most important point was being able to leave Roshar--a restriction that Dalinar could have lifted, as the largest remnant of Honor's Investiture--Dalinar refused, deciding that since Honor had died to keep Odium in the system, that point would need to remain. At this point, Odium came very close to incinerating Dalinar, almost losing control of his Intent, but managed to keep his temper in check. Eventually, they agreed that on the tenth day of the new month, they would each appoint a willing champion, who would be allowed to the top of Urithiru—unharmed by either side—to fight to the death. If Dalinar's champion won, Odium would return Alethkar and Herdaz to the coalition, fulfilling Dalinar's oath to the Mink. If Odium's champion won, he would keep those two nations and Dalinar would serve his interests in the wider cosmere as a Fused. In either case, Odium would remain bound to the Rosharan system, but would keep the other lands he had won and be able to send agents to the wider Cosmere, and both leaders would be required to enforce the peace to the best of their ability. Additionally, at least some of the protections specified for Hoid in Dalinar's initial proposal seem to be in effect."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '56b30dd9-9db2-4c03-a8b4-708838421c18'}, page_content="Odium - Taravangian's Ascension\n\nLater that day, Taravangian managed to manipulate Szeth and Rayse to come to him at the same time."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '56b30dd9-9db2-4c03-a8b4-708838421c18'}, page_content="Odium - When Rayse pulled him into a vision, Taravangian grabbed Nightblood's Cognitive aspect and stabbed Rayse with it, killing him. Right before this happened, Szeth had stabbed Taravangian with his belt knife, but just as he died, Taravangian Ascended to become Odium. His previous Old Magic afflictions seemed to vanish as soon as he Ascended, giving him both emotion and intelligence in far greater amounts, and he possessed all the power of the Shard of Odium. Taravangian realized that Rayse had been sliding towards oblivion for a very long time, as he had been severely weakened by his previous battles, especially against Honor; Rayse had been enslaved by the power he wielded. Rayse's body appeared in the place of Taravangian's, although it was so damaged by Nightblood that Szeth was unable to tell the difference. Some time later, when Hoid was walking the hallways in Elhokar's palace, Taravangian confronted him. When he asked Hoid what he would have done in Taravangian's place, Hoid realized that there was a new Vessel, and was unable to hide his terror. Taravangian then tampered with the Breaths that Wit was using to contain his memories, and retried the whole encounter, this time pretending to be Rayse much more effectively."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Ancient History', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '999f7d3d-4879-4a7a-ae0d-09e4cfcbe2cb'}, page_content="Odium -  Ancient History \n Creation and initial killings \nOdium was created at the Shattering, around ten-thousand years before the True Desolation,\n when the creator god, Adonalsium, was killed by sixteen people, splitting it into sixteen Shards. One of those killers was Rayse, who chose for himself the Shard of Odium. At some point after Ascending, Odium went after one of his fellow Shards, Ambition, as he felt most threatened by her intent. However, before he could find her, he located two other Shards, Devotion and Dominion, in the Selish system. Because they had settled together, Odium attacked them, since he could argue that they were breaking the agreement the Vessels made about not being in the same system as another Shard. Through means unknown, Odium killed and Splintered them both. To prevent their remaining power from gaining intelligence of its own, he then pulled it out of the Spiritual Realm and into the Cognitive, creating the Dor and causing Sel's magic systems to become location-dependent. He wasn't very experienced at the time, and his countermeasure failed as the Dor did, indeed, begin to gain a measure of sentience. After creating the Dor, Odium went on to the Threnodite system, where he found and attacked his initial target, Ambition. During the fight, Ambition was dealt a grievous wound, and chunks of her power were flung across the system."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Ancient History', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '999f7d3d-4879-4a7a-ae0d-09e4cfcbe2cb'}, page_content='Odium - Ambition managed to flee the system, but was still Splintered in a fight with Odium. The Shard Mercy was also involved in at least one battle with Ambition and Odium. These clashes resulted in a wound in the Spiritual Realm and had "disturbing" effects that "twisted" the planet Threnody and its inhabitants. Although Odium was successful in these initial conflicts, he was weakened and severely wounded by them. Battle with Honor \nNext, over seven-thousand Rosharan years before the True Desolation, Odium set out for Rosharan system, seeking to kill either Honor, Cultivation, or both According to the Eila Stele, he was brought by the humans from another world, and the singers considered him a human god. It can be assumed that Odium was crucial in the breakdown of the relations between the two species. Eventually, for unknown reasons, a swap occurred, whereupon singers came to worship Odium while humans began serving Honor and Cultivation. Both sides created their own immortal armies - Odium, the Fused, and Honor, the Heralds. Honor fought Odium with assistance from Cultivation, and the two bound him to one of the system\'s planets, Braize, and somehow also prevented him from acting directly against most individuals on Roshar. Honor additionally crafted the Oathpact, which would use the Heralds to imprison Odium\'s forces on Braize along with their master. However, Odium was a much better fighter, and Honor was killed, though he inflicted a deep wound on Odium.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Creation and initial killings', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e844d3f3-a94b-4f14-8e1d-7ae7219ce5a3'}, page_content="Odium -  Creation and initial killings \nOdium was created at the Shattering, around ten-thousand years before the True Desolation,\n when the creator god, Adonalsium, was killed by sixteen people, splitting it into sixteen Shards. One of those killers was Rayse, who chose for himself the Shard of Odium. At some point after Ascending, Odium went after one of his fellow Shards, Ambition, as he felt most threatened by her intent. However, before he could find her, he located two other Shards, Devotion and Dominion, in the Selish system. Because they had settled together, Odium attacked them, since he could argue that they were breaking the agreement the Vessels made about not being in the same system as another Shard. Through means unknown, Odium killed and Splintered them both. To prevent their remaining power from gaining intelligence of its own, he then pulled it out of the Spiritual Realm and into the Cognitive, creating the Dor and causing Sel's magic systems to become location-dependent. He wasn't very experienced at the time, and his countermeasure failed as the Dor did, indeed, begin to gain a measure of sentience. After creating the Dor, Odium went on to the Threnodite system, where he found and attacked his initial target, Ambition. During the fight, Ambition was dealt a grievous wound, and chunks of her power were flung across the system."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Creation and initial killings', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e844d3f3-a94b-4f14-8e1d-7ae7219ce5a3'}, page_content='Odium - Ambition managed to flee the system, but was still Splintered in a fight with Odium. The Shard Mercy was also involved in at least one battle with Ambition and Odium. These clashes resulted in a wound in the Spiritual Realm and had "disturbing" effects that "twisted" the planet Threnody and its inhabitants. Although Odium was successful in these initial conflicts, he was weakened and severely wounded by them.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle with Honor', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2f7e89ac-c984-4291-80fe-86fb83dc7526'}, page_content='Odium -  Battle with Honor \nNext, over seven-thousand Rosharan years before the True Desolation, Odium set out for Rosharan system, seeking to kill either Honor, Cultivation, or both According to the Eila Stele, he was brought by the humans from another world, and the singers considered him a human god. It can be assumed that Odium was crucial in the breakdown of the relations between the two species.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle with Honor', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2f7e89ac-c984-4291-80fe-86fb83dc7526'}, page_content="Odium - Eventually, for unknown reasons, a swap occurred, whereupon singers came to worship Odium while humans began serving Honor and Cultivation. Both sides created their own immortal armies - Odium, the Fused, and Honor, the Heralds. Honor fought Odium with assistance from Cultivation, and the two bound him to one of the system's planets, Braize, and somehow also prevented him from acting directly against most individuals on Roshar. Honor additionally crafted the Oathpact, which would use the Heralds to imprison Odium's forces on Braize along with their master. However, Odium was a much better fighter, and Honor was killed, though he inflicted a deep wound on Odium."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Preparations', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d324c84-0aea-4734-9a45-39c25b537c4a'}, page_content="Odium -  Preparations \nKilling Honor did not free Odium from Braize, and the sacrifice of the Herald Taln meant that he could not send his armies to Roshar. And so, for the next four and a half thousand years, he prepared for the time when Taln would break, allowing for one last Desolation -- the True Desolation. Odium, though severely limited by Honor's actions, was nonetheless active. He also kept a limited awareness of what was going on all across the cosmere, and was aware that Ruin and Preservation had combined to become Harmony in Scadrian Year , over three-hundred years before the True Desolation. The idea of someone taking up two Shards at once, and finding harmony between them, terrified him. He therefore began formulating a plan to eliminate this threat after being freed from the Rosharan System. As one of his Unmade, Nergaoul, was still free, Odium sent him to Alethkar to facilitate the Thrill among the Alethi. Over the centuries, the battle-rage brought about by Nergaoul became normal, and even desirable to the Alethi men; this developed affinity allowed Odium to control them using the Thrill. Moreover, the Thrill allowed Odium to groom a champion whom he could later put in command of his armies and use to release himself. In the final decades of the Era of Solitude, such a potential champion appeared in the form of Dalinar Kholin. Odium focused on him to ensure he had as many hooks in him as possible."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Preparations', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6d324c84-0aea-4734-9a45-39c25b537c4a'}, page_content="Odium - Odium also focused on the listeners, a group of singers that had denied him some centuries prior. On the day of a treaty between them and the Alethi, Odium used one of his voidspren to lead them to buy an assassin, Szeth, who was used when Eshonai found out that the Alethi king, Gavilar Kholin, intended to release the very gods the listeners had once fled. Whether Gavilar's plan was inspired by Odium or not, it pushed the listeners to assassinate him, leading to the War of Reckoning. The War brought tremendous losses to the listeners, until the idea of assuming the old forms of power grew appealing to them. Through Ulim, Odium persuaded the listeners to assume stormform and summon the Everstorm, beginning the True Desolation."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'True Desolation', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8173fba9-a500-40b5-a826-ae89c0a1bc05'}, page_content="Odium -  True Desolation \n Preparing a champion \nAs the True Desolation began and the Fused started taking over human territory, Odium focused on Dalinar Kholin while maneuvering his forces towards Thaylen City, where the confrontation between the two sides would occur. He penetrated one of Dalinar's visions and let him believe that Odium was the Almighty for a short while before revealing himself. Although Dalinar refused to release him, Odium was certain that Dalinar would eventually do so, and showed him his true form when Dalinar began to get too comfortable. He did not, however, agree to the contest of champions Dalinar suggested. Odium also interacted with Venli. He stopped the Fused from taking her body and granted her envoyform instead to spread his propaganda among the newly awakened singers. When she didn't work hard enough to his satisfaction, he tortured and threatened her, causing Venli to reconsider her current allegiance further. Dalinar and Odium spoke once more in a different vision, after Dalinar attempted to negotiate with Venli. Odium initially attempted to tear the vision apart, although Dalinar managed to send Venli out of it before that could happen."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'True Desolation', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8173fba9-a500-40b5-a826-ae89c0a1bc05'}, page_content="Odium - Odium then appeared to Dalinar and scolded him for thinking that any sort of accord between the two races was possible, before reassuring Dalinar that peace would, indeed, happen -- after Roshar was destroyed. Battle of Thaylen Field \n\nOdium decided to lead his forces on Thaylen City personally, although he didn't intend to use the plain singers in battle. He first sent a pair of thunderclasts, one to destroy the city walls, and the other to get to the Thaylen Gemstone Reserve, along with Fused to ensure that the King's Drop wouldn't fall into the wrong hands."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'True Desolation', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8173fba9-a500-40b5-a826-ae89c0a1bc05'}, page_content="Odium - Then, Odium used Nergaoul and the Alethi dependence on the Thrill to possess the Sadeas princedom forces in the city and make them turn against their own allies. Odium then went, taking with him Venli and several other Fused, to confront Dalinar in front of the city. Dalinar once more repeated his demand for the contest of champions, and this time, Odium agreed, before revealing that his champion would be Dalinar himself. By reminding Dalinar of his past crimes, chief among them the murder of his wife, Evi, Odium attempted to persuade Dalinar to surrender his guilt and accept that it was all Odium's fault. However, though Dalinar was initially horrified, he refused to give in. Odium could only watch, speechless, as Dalinar's newfound resolve allowed him to swear the Third Ideal of the Bondsmiths and open Honor's Perpendicularity. This development horrified Odium, especially when he recognized whatever Dalinar became at this moment. Realizing that he lost his trump card -- and that Dalinar could now push him into a real contest of champions -- Odium swiftly retreated from the field, leaving his armies to lose the battle. Deal with Taravangian \nKing Taravangian of Kharbranth had been planning to strike a deal with Odium for some time, as neither he nor his Diagram believed that defeating a god would be plausible. As such, he found a way to communicate with the Shard, both by writing and through actions such as opening the Kholinar Oathgate to let the Voidbringers invade Urithiru. Some time after the Battle of Thaylen Field, Odium obliged him, visiting him in Urithiru after Taravangian let him in by opening a window. Odium revealed that he knew perfectly well that Taravangian had both brilliant and less intelligent days, and deliberately visited on one of the latter, to make sure that Taravangian knew he had nothing to negotiate with. Though Odium praised the Diagram, he used it to show how much further his own future sight reached. This inadvertently let Taravangian know that Odium was unable to perceive anything involving Renarin Kholin. By reading the Diagram, Taravangian eventually managed to negotiate with Odium, though his initial offering of sparing anyone Taravangian ruled was discarded, with Odium pointing out that Taravangian sought to become the king of the whole of Roshar. Eventually, the two settled on sparing the citizens of Kharbranth and their spouses. Contest of Champions \nA year later, Odium brought Dalinar into a vision and agreed to set the terms of their contest. Although Odium's most important point was being able to leave Roshar--a restriction that Dalinar could have lifted, as the largest remnant of Honor's Investiture--Dalinar refused, deciding that since Honor had died to keep Odium in the system, that point would need to remain. At this point, Odium came very close to incinerating Dalinar, almost losing control of his Intent, but managed to keep his temper in check. Eventually, they agreed that on the tenth day of the new month, they would each appoint a willing champion, who would be allowed to the top of Urithiru—unharmed by either side—to fight to the death. If Dalinar's champion won, Odium would return Alethkar and Herdaz to the coalition, fulfilling Dalinar's oath to the Mink. If Odium's champion won, he would keep those two nations and Dalinar would serve his interests in the wider cosmere as a Fused. In either case, Odium would remain bound to the Rosharan system, but would keep the other lands he had won and be able to send agents to the wider Cosmere, and both leaders would be required to enforce the peace to the best of their ability. Additionally, at least some of the protections specified for Hoid in Dalinar's initial proposal seem to be in effect."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Preparing a champion', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '70922e48-cd2f-4743-b769-ca306d6c97ce'}, page_content="Odium -  Preparing a champion \nAs the True Desolation began and the Fused started taking over human territory, Odium focused on Dalinar Kholin while maneuvering his forces towards Thaylen City, where the confrontation between the two sides would occur. He penetrated one of Dalinar's visions and let him believe that Odium was the Almighty for a short while before revealing himself. Although Dalinar refused to release him, Odium was certain that Dalinar would eventually do so, and showed him his true form when Dalinar began to get too comfortable. He did not, however, agree to the contest of champions Dalinar suggested."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Preparing a champion', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '70922e48-cd2f-4743-b769-ca306d6c97ce'}, page_content="Odium - Odium also interacted with Venli. He stopped the Fused from taking her body and granted her envoyform instead to spread his propaganda among the newly awakened singers. When she didn't work hard enough to his satisfaction, he tortured and threatened her, causing Venli to reconsider her current allegiance further. Dalinar and Odium spoke once more in a different vision, after Dalinar attempted to negotiate with Venli. Odium initially attempted to tear the vision apart, although Dalinar managed to send Venli out of it before that could happen. Odium then appeared to Dalinar and scolded him for thinking that any sort of accord between the two races was possible, before reassuring Dalinar that peace would, indeed, happen -- after Roshar was destroyed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle of Thaylen Field', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '291aa7ba-a925-42f2-862d-8a11a63a7fff'}, page_content="Odium -  Battle of Thaylen Field \n\nOdium decided to lead his forces on Thaylen City personally, although he didn't intend to use the plain singers in battle. He first sent a pair of thunderclasts, one to destroy the city walls, and the other to get to the Thaylen Gemstone Reserve, along with Fused to ensure that the King's Drop wouldn't fall into the wrong hands."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Battle of Thaylen Field', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '291aa7ba-a925-42f2-862d-8a11a63a7fff'}, page_content="Odium - Then, Odium used Nergaoul and the Alethi dependence on the Thrill to possess the Sadeas princedom forces in the city and make them turn against their own allies. Odium then went, taking with him Venli and several other Fused, to confront Dalinar in front of the city. Dalinar once more repeated his demand for the contest of champions, and this time, Odium agreed, before revealing that his champion would be Dalinar himself. By reminding Dalinar of his past crimes, chief among them the murder of his wife, Evi, Odium attempted to persuade Dalinar to surrender his guilt and accept that it was all Odium's fault. However, though Dalinar was initially horrified, he refused to give in. Odium could only watch, speechless, as Dalinar's newfound resolve allowed him to swear the Third Ideal of the Bondsmiths and open Honor's Perpendicularity. This development horrified Odium, especially when he recognized whatever Dalinar became at this moment. Realizing that he lost his trump card -- and that Dalinar could now push him into a real contest of champions -- Odium swiftly retreated from the field, leaving his armies to lose the battle."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Deal with Taravangian', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9d5d546e-16e8-491d-b48c-39e06573c606'}, page_content='Odium -  Deal with Taravangian \nKing Taravangian of Kharbranth had been planning to strike a deal with Odium for some time, as neither he nor his Diagram believed that defeating a god would be plausible. As such, he found a way to communicate with the Shard, both by writing and through actions such as opening the Kholinar Oathgate to let the Voidbringers invade Urithiru. Some time after the Battle of Thaylen Field, Odium obliged him, visiting him in Urithiru after Taravangian let him in by opening a window.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Deal with Taravangian', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9d5d546e-16e8-491d-b48c-39e06573c606'}, page_content='Odium - Odium revealed that he knew perfectly well that Taravangian had both brilliant and less intelligent days, and deliberately visited on one of the latter, to make sure that Taravangian knew he had nothing to negotiate with. Though Odium praised the Diagram, he used it to show how much further his own future sight reached. This inadvertently let Taravangian know that Odium was unable to perceive anything involving Renarin Kholin. By reading the Diagram, Taravangian eventually managed to negotiate with Odium, though his initial offering of sparing anyone Taravangian ruled was discarded, with Odium pointing out that Taravangian sought to become the king of the whole of Roshar. Eventually, the two settled on sparing the citizens of Kharbranth and their spouses.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Contest of Champions', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1e35d433-530c-4fb6-9b07-89e5e7bd22de'}, page_content="Odium -  Contest of Champions \nA year later, Odium brought Dalinar into a vision and agreed to set the terms of their contest. Although Odium's most important point was being able to leave Roshar--a restriction that Dalinar could have lifted, as the largest remnant of Honor's Investiture--Dalinar refused, deciding that since Honor had died to keep Odium in the system, that point would need to remain. At this point, Odium came very close to incinerating Dalinar, almost losing control of his Intent, but managed to keep his temper in check. Eventually, they agreed that on the tenth day of the new month, they would each appoint a willing champion, who would be allowed to the top of Urithiru—unharmed by either side—to fight to the death. If Dalinar's champion won, Odium would return Alethkar and Herdaz to the coalition, fulfilling Dalinar's oath to the Mink."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Contest of Champions', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1e35d433-530c-4fb6-9b07-89e5e7bd22de'}, page_content="Odium - If Odium's champion won, he would keep those two nations and Dalinar would serve his interests in the wider cosmere as a Fused. In either case, Odium would remain bound to the Rosharan system, but would keep the other lands he had won and be able to send agents to the wider Cosmere, and both leaders would be required to enforce the peace to the best of their ability. Additionally, at least some of the protections specified for Hoid in Dalinar's initial proposal seem to be in effect."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Taravangian's Ascension", 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '22475211-023e-4530-8ebb-b293b049cc0d'}, page_content="Odium - Taravangian's Ascension\n\nLater that day, Taravangian managed to manipulate Szeth and Rayse to come to him at the same time. When Rayse pulled him into a vision, Taravangian grabbed Nightblood's Cognitive aspect and stabbed Rayse with it, killing him. Right before this happened, Szeth had stabbed Taravangian with his belt knife, but just as he died, Taravangian Ascended to become Odium. His previous Old Magic afflictions seemed to vanish as soon as he Ascended, giving him both emotion and intelligence in far greater amounts, and he possessed all the power of the Shard of Odium. Taravangian realized that Rayse had been sliding towards oblivion for a very long time, as he had been severely weakened by his previous battles, especially against Honor; Rayse had been enslaved by the power he wielded. Rayse's body appeared in the place of Taravangian's, although it was so damaged by Nightblood that Szeth was unable to tell the difference. Some time later, when Hoid was walking the hallways in Elhokar's palace, Taravangian confronted him."), Document(metadata={'heading': "Taravangian's Ascension", 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '22475211-023e-4530-8ebb-b293b049cc0d'}, page_content="Odium - When he asked Hoid what he would have done in Taravangian's place, Hoid realized that there was a new Vessel, and was unable to hide his terror. Taravangian then tampered with the Breaths that Wit was using to contain his memories, and retried the whole encounter, this time pretending to be Rayse much more effectively."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Influence', 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '60772132-b73a-49ad-a7b6-112e405e1fed'}, page_content="Odium -  Influence \n\nThroughout his existence, Odium has had profound effect on the cosmere and several of its planets in particular. He has been called the most frightening and terrible of all Shards, and with good reason. He has a wish to become the sole god in the Cosmere, and to that end, he has gone around the Cosmere Splintering, or attempting to Splinter, all other Shards. On Sel, Odium's murder of Devotion and Dominion suffused the entirety of the planet's Cognitive Realm, fuelling its magic systems. The seons and skaze are splinters of Devotion and Dominion respectively. On Threnody, Odium's battle with Ambition had vast ramifications for the entire system, though what exactly this entails is unclear. It's possible that the Evil that had taken over Homeland, as well as the Shades, is a side effect of the battle between the Shards. Harmony noted a wound on the Spiritual Realm itself where Ambition was Splintered."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Influence', 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '60772132-b73a-49ad-a7b6-112e405e1fed'}, page_content="Odium - On Roshar, Odium's influence is felt most acutely through the numerous Desolations he caused, as well as the murder and subsequent splintering of Honor, which made the Stormfather what he is today. He is known obliquely in the various religions of the world as the leader of the voidspren and the force behind the Voidbringers. In the present, the Everstorm and the True Desolation are his doing."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '32cace7b-0e13-4156-8165-f685c2c224e3'}, page_content='Odium -  Trivia \n Odium is one of the only five characters who have spoken in small-caps, the other four are: Sylphrena, Cultivation, Dalinar, and the Stormfather. Odium\'s original name was Hatred; Brandon changed it because, in his words, it was "too on-the-nose", while the name Odium brought the Shard a step closer to Passion. The mere mention of the word Odium makes Syl hiss. Odium is very scared of Harmony. Odium might currently have an alliance -- or, at least, an understanding -- with Bavadin, the Vessel of Autonomy, although he was considering double-crossing her after dealing with Honor and Cultivation. He\'s also allied with a cosmere power other than her. In Magic:The Gathering colors, Odium would be red. Odium is weirded out by Lift.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Odium', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '32cace7b-0e13-4156-8165-f685c2c224e3'}, page_content="Odium - Rayse hates puppies. Jasnah would be a good candidate for controlling Odium's power. Odium was not in possession of a Dawnshard. Rayse was aware of Thaidakar. It is unknown whether Taravangian is."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Realmatic Theory', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '49962d77-820d-4340-bbd7-242a3416657b'}, page_content="Realmatic Theory - Realmatic Theory refers to the study of the three Realms—Physical, Cognitive, and Spiritual—that constitute the fundamental structure of the cosmere. Along with other fundamental properties like space and time, the Realms were created at the cosmere's equivalent of the Big Bang, before the Shattering of Adonalsium."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Components', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2b7a2f90-715d-490c-b706-083068762adf'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Components \n\n Physical Realm \n\nOf the three Realms, the Physical Realm is the most readily understood as it behaves in much the same way that our universe does. It is the natural world as we experience it with our senses, consisting of space and time and adhering to empirical scientific law. Unlike the Cognitive Realm, the Physical Realm is a three-dimensional plane. The two Realms are not mapped perfectly to each other for this reason. The cosmere is a single star cluster within the Physical Realm consisting of between fifty and one hundred stars, though at least one person has tried to travel beyond that. Travel between planets within the cluster can be achieved without using either of the other Realms through purely Physical FTL (faster-than-light) travel, and various civilizations have developed such Physical Realm interstellar travel, through unknown means. Investiture within the Physical Realm will manifest as a solid, liquid, or gas.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Components', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2b7a2f90-715d-490c-b706-083068762adf'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - Solid Investiture in the Physical Realm is metallic. Pushing the entirety of a Shard’s Investiture into the Physical Realm would have disastrous effects. Changes in the Spiritual Realm filter down to and cause changes in the Physical Realm. Perception has a part in those Physical changes. After a person dies, they need a continued tie to the Physical Realm to prevent passing to the Beyond after death. Someone with such a tie could become a Cognitive Shadow. It is made up of fundamental particles known as axi, which make up matter.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Components', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2b7a2f90-715d-490c-b706-083068762adf'}, page_content="Realmatic Theory - Each individual axon has a polarity. Cognitive Realm \n\nThe Cognitive Realm is the world of thought and perception. It is known locally on Roshar as Shadesmar, though at least some academics of Silverlight have taken to using the term to refer to the entire Realm. A planet's reflection in the Cognitive Realm is referred to as a subastral. The nature and appearance of objects in this Realm are shaped by the views of people and even the objects themselves. The environment itself changes from one world to the next, often exhibiting features characteristic of that world. Investiture, including that within souls, glows visibly within the Cognitive Realm. While time appears to flow normally, space is also warped by perception. Some aspect of the nature of the Realm allows one to walk to space, and the distance between worlds is significantly contracted, so that traveling from one world to the next by foot is possible. Indeed, worldhoppers generally make use of this Realm to move between worlds. Traveling between the Physical and the Cognitive Realms may be accomplished at perpendicularities, among other means. Spiritual Realm \n\nThe Spiritual Realm exists beyond space and time. It is made up entirely of Investiture and Connections. This Realm contains a person's spiritweb, which is a person’s Spiritual aspect. The spiritweb is closely related to a soul, but they are not the same. The soul is a philosophical concept while a spiritweb can be measured and quantified. It also contains information on a thing’s Identity, Connection, and Fortune. Looking into the Spiritual Realm is required for cosmere future sight. Most of the Investiture that makes up a Shard’s power exists within the Spiritual Realm."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Physical Realm', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '36f949b5-378b-4da0-bba1-d627cb511736'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Physical Realm \n\nOf the three Realms, the Physical Realm is the most readily understood as it behaves in much the same way that our universe does. It is the natural world as we experience it with our senses, consisting of space and time and adhering to empirical scientific law. Unlike the Cognitive Realm, the Physical Realm is a three-dimensional plane. The two Realms are not mapped perfectly to each other for this reason. The cosmere is a single star cluster within the Physical Realm consisting of between fifty and one hundred stars, though at least one person has tried to travel beyond that. Travel between planets within the cluster can be achieved without using either of the other Realms through purely Physical FTL (faster-than-light) travel, and various civilizations have developed such Physical Realm interstellar travel, through unknown means. Investiture within the Physical Realm will manifest as a solid, liquid, or gas.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Physical Realm', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '36f949b5-378b-4da0-bba1-d627cb511736'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - Solid Investiture in the Physical Realm is metallic. Pushing the entirety of a Shard’s Investiture into the Physical Realm would have disastrous effects. Changes in the Spiritual Realm filter down to and cause changes in the Physical Realm. Perception has a part in those Physical changes. After a person dies, they need a continued tie to the Physical Realm to prevent passing to the Beyond after death. Someone with such a tie could become a Cognitive Shadow. It is made up of fundamental particles known as axi, which make up matter. Each individual axon has a polarity.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cognitive Realm', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b6684309-1f2f-4d6a-b556-33922d4f6a48'}, page_content="Realmatic Theory -  Cognitive Realm \n\nThe Cognitive Realm is the world of thought and perception. It is known locally on Roshar as Shadesmar, though at least some academics of Silverlight have taken to using the term to refer to the entire Realm. A planet's reflection in the Cognitive Realm is referred to as a subastral. The nature and appearance of objects in this Realm are shaped by the views of people and even the objects themselves."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cognitive Realm', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b6684309-1f2f-4d6a-b556-33922d4f6a48'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - The environment itself changes from one world to the next, often exhibiting features characteristic of that world. Investiture, including that within souls, glows visibly within the Cognitive Realm. While time appears to flow normally, space is also warped by perception. Some aspect of the nature of the Realm allows one to walk to space, and the distance between worlds is significantly contracted, so that traveling from one world to the next by foot is possible. Indeed, worldhoppers generally make use of this Realm to move between worlds. Traveling between the Physical and the Cognitive Realms may be accomplished at perpendicularities, among other means.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Spiritual Realm', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f4097263-18da-4e15-82e6-3eae8057dbc1'}, page_content="Realmatic Theory -  Spiritual Realm \n\nThe Spiritual Realm exists beyond space and time. It is made up entirely of Investiture and Connections. This Realm contains a person's spiritweb, which is a person’s Spiritual aspect. The spiritweb is closely related to a soul, but they are not the same. The soul is a philosophical concept while a spiritweb can be measured and quantified. It also contains information on a thing’s Identity, Connection, and Fortune."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Spiritual Realm', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f4097263-18da-4e15-82e6-3eae8057dbc1'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - Looking into the Spiritual Realm is required for cosmere future sight. Most of the Investiture that makes up a Shard’s power exists within the Spiritual Realm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Interactions', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e95f293e-0ae9-43ff-9fcc-6f6f1c6a4cbe'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Interactions \n Perception \nPerception is a vital part of how the three versions of a person or an object interact with each other. The Spiritual Realm filters through the Cognitive Realm to get to the Physical Realm. While the Spiritual Realm contains the ideal version of something, the Cognitive filter makes sure the Physical version matches their perception of what should be. One of the ways this manifests is in healing. For example, until he swears his Fourth Ideal, Kaladin feels he deserves his slave brands, so they don’t heal. Lopen, on the other hand, never viewed himself as disabled, so his arm grew back. The application of this can extend to changing the body of a transgender person to match their identity or rejoining Conjoined twins that were separated. Perception is also important for how the Invested Arts interact with the three Realms.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Interactions', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e95f293e-0ae9-43ff-9fcc-6f6f1c6a4cbe'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - What a person thinks they can do often limits what they can actually do. For example, Shallan required ten heartbeats to summon Pattern as a Shardblade, despite him being a living blade. Perception makes using a soulstamp on an object easier or more difficult. The more an object is viewed as a whole, the easier it is to soulstamp. Perception of an object can and does change over time.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Interactions', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e95f293e-0ae9-43ff-9fcc-6f6f1c6a4cbe'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - As an object changes owner or various ingredients are combined into a whole, people’s perception of the objects change. The transition does not happen instantaneously. There will be a period of time when the line is fuzzy and multiple perceptions of an object can be true. Investiture \n\nIn addition to having ordinary mass and energy, the cosmere also has a magical power known as Investiture. Investiture is closely tied to the Spiritual Realm, which holds a vast reserve of Investiture, but ultimately transcends the divisions between the three Realms. Over time, Investiture will cycle between the Realms, but ultimately returns to the Spiritual Realm. Like matter and energy, high concentrations of Investiture curve space, but it primarily affects the geometry of the Realms and brings them closer together rather than creating ordinary gravitational effects. At a certain point, this effect will cause a perpendicularity to form. Perpendicularities \n\nUnder certain circumstances, the Realms will bend to the point where they are no longer separate and are instead connected by a perpendicularity. The most common cause of a perpendicularity is a high concentration of Investiture in either the Physical or Cognitive Realms—though this is harder to achieve in the Cognitive Realm—but other methods work as well. Because they are built out of Investiture, perpendicularities will collapse if Nightblood is used to attack it. Perpendicularities can be used to see into the Spiritual Realm and to transition between Realms, though someone has to know what the perpendicularity does in order to use it. This requirement gets weird for non-sapient things, but a creature like an Aviar could reasonably transition between Realms with a perpendicularity. Perpendicularities are the most common method worldhoppers use to transition between the Realms, but they are not the only method. As a large amount of Investiture is generally required to create a perpendicularity, they most often appear when a Shard takes up residence on a world. The process of creating a perpendicularity begins to occur naturally once a Shard arrives on a world, but Shards can control where and how the perpendicularity manifests. They can also choose to create more than one, to create one on a world they do not inhabit, and to share in the creation of one with another Shard. A perpendicularity generated by a Shard will usually remain in place if the Shard\'s Vessel dies, but not always. While most perpendicularities are created by Shards, they can also be created by other methods. Some Invested Arts, like the Surge of Transportation, are particularly built to accomplish this. Other methods of creating a perpendicularity include storing a sufficient amount of Investiture in a nicrosilmind, an unknown method of "morbid origin" used on Threnody that creates predictably unstable and hard to predict perpendicularities, and an unspecified ability of Bondsmiths bonded to the Stormfather after Honor\'s death. Shards \n\nWhile the Shards of Adonalsium exist primarily in the Spiritual Realm, their immense power has notable effects on all three of the Realms. Perhaps most significantly, Realmatic interactions between a Shard and a planet are what define the structure of any Invested Arts associated with that Shard on that planet. Shards can consciously make some changes to this structure, but the extent to which they can interfere is limited. If a Shard used their power to create the planet in the first place (as Preservation and Ruin did with Scadrial), they will be able to exercise more control. As Shards are composed of a significant amount of Investiture, their presence also bends the local Realmatic geometry. This effect is mostly limited to the Cognitive Realm, where a Shard\'s presence is partially responsible for the planet\'s subastral taking up a relatively large space compared to the space between planets. If a Shard remains in a system for some time, this Realmatic bending will generally result in the formation of a perpendicularity. If a Shard wishes, they may also use their Investiture to curve the Realms in a way that creates a body in the Physical Realm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Perception', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '52c9baed-bc61-4e61-9d59-b59b7018ddb4'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Perception \nPerception is a vital part of how the three versions of a person or an object interact with each other. The Spiritual Realm filters through the Cognitive Realm to get to the Physical Realm. While the Spiritual Realm contains the ideal version of something, the Cognitive filter makes sure the Physical version matches their perception of what should be. One of the ways this manifests is in healing. For example, until he swears his Fourth Ideal, Kaladin feels he deserves his slave brands, so they don’t heal. Lopen, on the other hand, never viewed himself as disabled, so his arm grew back. The application of this can extend to changing the body of a transgender person to match their identity or rejoining Conjoined twins that were separated. Perception is also important for how the Invested Arts interact with the three Realms.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Perception', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '52c9baed-bc61-4e61-9d59-b59b7018ddb4'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - What a person thinks they can do often limits what they can actually do. For example, Shallan required ten heartbeats to summon Pattern as a Shardblade, despite him being a living blade. Perception makes using a soulstamp on an object easier or more difficult. The more an object is viewed as a whole, the easier it is to soulstamp. Perception of an object can and does change over time. As an object changes owner or various ingredients are combined into a whole, people’s perception of the objects change. The transition does not happen instantaneously. There will be a period of time when the line is fuzzy and multiple perceptions of an object can be true.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Investiture', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e999b6be-3bf9-4575-b520-c2c30dac1ccc'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Investiture \n\nIn addition to having ordinary mass and energy, the cosmere also has a magical power known as Investiture. Investiture is closely tied to the Spiritual Realm, which holds a vast reserve of Investiture, but ultimately transcends the divisions between the three Realms.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Investiture', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e999b6be-3bf9-4575-b520-c2c30dac1ccc'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - Over time, Investiture will cycle between the Realms, but ultimately returns to the Spiritual Realm. Like matter and energy, high concentrations of Investiture curve space, but it primarily affects the geometry of the Realms and brings them closer together rather than creating ordinary gravitational effects. At a certain point, this effect will cause a perpendicularity to form.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Perpendicularities', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b2d564b4-6146-4849-a39c-a86a474753d0'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Perpendicularities \n\nUnder certain circumstances, the Realms will bend to the point where they are no longer separate and are instead connected by a perpendicularity. The most common cause of a perpendicularity is a high concentration of Investiture in either the Physical or Cognitive Realms—though this is harder to achieve in the Cognitive Realm—but other methods work as well. Because they are built out of Investiture, perpendicularities will collapse if Nightblood is used to attack it. Perpendicularities can be used to see into the Spiritual Realm and to transition between Realms, though someone has to know what the perpendicularity does in order to use it. This requirement gets weird for non-sapient things, but a creature like an Aviar could reasonably transition between Realms with a perpendicularity. Perpendicularities are the most common method worldhoppers use to transition between the Realms, but they are not the only method.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Perpendicularities', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'b2d564b4-6146-4849-a39c-a86a474753d0'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - As a large amount of Investiture is generally required to create a perpendicularity, they most often appear when a Shard takes up residence on a world. The process of creating a perpendicularity begins to occur naturally once a Shard arrives on a world, but Shards can control where and how the perpendicularity manifests. They can also choose to create more than one, to create one on a world they do not inhabit, and to share in the creation of one with another Shard. A perpendicularity generated by a Shard will usually remain in place if the Shard\'s Vessel dies, but not always. While most perpendicularities are created by Shards, they can also be created by other methods. Some Invested Arts, like the Surge of Transportation, are particularly built to accomplish this. Other methods of creating a perpendicularity include storing a sufficient amount of Investiture in a nicrosilmind, an unknown method of "morbid origin" used on Threnody that creates predictably unstable and hard to predict perpendicularities, and an unspecified ability of Bondsmiths bonded to the Stormfather after Honor\'s death.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Shards', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '664b492e-0fff-475b-9750-6bf4bdc632da'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Shards \n\nWhile the Shards of Adonalsium exist primarily in the Spiritual Realm, their immense power has notable effects on all three of the Realms. Perhaps most significantly, Realmatic interactions between a Shard and a planet are what define the structure of any Invested Arts associated with that Shard on that planet.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Shards', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '664b492e-0fff-475b-9750-6bf4bdc632da'}, page_content="Realmatic Theory - Shards can consciously make some changes to this structure, but the extent to which they can interfere is limited. If a Shard used their power to create the planet in the first place (as Preservation and Ruin did with Scadrial), they will be able to exercise more control. As Shards are composed of a significant amount of Investiture, their presence also bends the local Realmatic geometry. This effect is mostly limited to the Cognitive Realm, where a Shard's presence is partially responsible for the planet's subastral taking up a relatively large space compared to the space between planets. If a Shard remains in a system for some time, this Realmatic bending will generally result in the formation of a perpendicularity. If a Shard wishes, they may also use their Investiture to curve the Realms in a way that creates a body in the Physical Realm."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Culture', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '30332722-bc83-45db-abf3-667b7bbe1948'}, page_content="Realmatic Theory -  Culture \n Nalthis \nOn Nalthis, the Five Scholars stumbled upon Realmatic Theory and the broader cosmere during their studies and are known among the scholars of Silverlight for their discoveries. Subsequent Nalthian scholars appear to have retained some of the Five Scholars' knowledge and, aside from worldhoppers, are probably the most aware of the mechanics of the cosmere. Indeed, the Nalthian perpendicularity has customs, suggesting Nalthis has a sizable population with at least some Realmatic awareness. Roshar \nOn Roshar, the philosopher Gavarah first developed Realmatic Theory some time well before 1173. Since then, her theory appears to have become widely accepted among scholars, who are aware that the Spiritual Realm is a place of pure truth but the Cognitive Realm is more malleable. However, it appears that few, if any, scholars have actually studied it in detail, as Jasnah Kholin was unable to find much information on the Cognitive Realm with six years of research. This difficulty may be compounded by the fact that some religions have integrated aspects of Realmatic Theory into their theology, though the return of the Knights Radiant and the reactivation of the Oathgates may soon lead to new knowledge. Scadrial \n\nOn Scadrial, the ancient Terris were aware of Realmatic Theory and included it in their religion. This knowledge may have come from experimentation with Feruchemy, which organizes its metals into quadrants based on which Realms they affect. Their research into Realmatic Theory appears to have been an ongoing affair; when he met Alendi, the Worldbringer Kwaan was studying the Cognitive aspects of trees. Much of this knowledge appears to have been lost when Rashek destroyed the Terris religion, though at least some of it was retained by the First Generation of the kandra. Sazed included some basic information on Realmatic Theory in the Words of Founding. Since the Catacendre, the Terris have been experimenting with the Feruchemical metals that store Spiritual properties, but refuse to speak of those powers with non-Terris. The kandra and the Set have also been conducting research and have likewise been keeping it quiet. As a result of this secrecy, the people of the Elendel Basin at-large seem to have little more knowledge of Realmatic Theory than they received in the Words of Founding. However, this situation may soon change as the people of the Basin begin to interact with the Southern Scadrians."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Culture', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '30332722-bc83-45db-abf3-667b7bbe1948'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - The people of Southern Scadrial have a much more advanced understanding of Realmatic Theory. Ten years after the Catacendre, Kelsier arrived in their lands and gave them the tools and knowledge needed to make unsealed brassminds. After he left, the Southern Scadrians were able to use what they knew to figure out how to make unsealed metalminds for all abilities in the Metallic Arts. They have been unable to create unsealed metalminds that grant more than three abilities, suggesting that the Realmatic principles involved become more complex as more abilities are added to the metalmind. Sel \n\nThe people of Sel have developed the most advanced knowledge of Realmatic Theory of any planet in the cosmere. The MaiPon learned much about Realmatic Theory and how it relates to Forgery by study and observation and are aware of concepts like Identity and Connection.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Culture', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '30332722-bc83-45db-abf3-667b7bbe1948'}, page_content="Realmatic Theory - The Ire, and perhaps other pre-Reod Elantrians, similarly had an advanced understanding of Realmatic Theory. Silverlight \nWell before the True Desolation, the city of Silverlight was founded. Located entirely in the Cognitive Realm, Silverlight is home to many worldhoppers who have settled down as well as several people who live their entire lives there. Located as it is in the Cognitive Realm, most of Silverlight's residents are aware of the mechanics of the cosmere. Additionally, Silverlight is also home to several universities with scholars who study the cosmere, at least one of which was founded by Khriss."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Nalthis', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6aa7de2a-1c56-4a7e-b887-8a19ddc4749f'}, page_content="Realmatic Theory -  Nalthis \nOn Nalthis, the Five Scholars stumbled upon Realmatic Theory and the broader cosmere during their studies and are known among the scholars of Silverlight for their discoveries. Subsequent Nalthian scholars appear to have retained some of the Five Scholars' knowledge and, aside from worldhoppers, are probably the most aware of the mechanics of the cosmere."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Nalthis', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6aa7de2a-1c56-4a7e-b887-8a19ddc4749f'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - Indeed, the Nalthian perpendicularity has customs, suggesting Nalthis has a sizable population with at least some Realmatic awareness.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Roshar', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8e843303-7462-4845-8db4-a25e14fe398e'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Roshar \nOn Roshar, the philosopher Gavarah first developed Realmatic Theory some time well before 1173. Since then, her theory appears to have become widely accepted among scholars, who are aware that the Spiritual Realm is a place of pure truth but the Cognitive Realm is more malleable.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Roshar', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8e843303-7462-4845-8db4-a25e14fe398e'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - However, it appears that few, if any, scholars have actually studied it in detail, as Jasnah Kholin was unable to find much information on the Cognitive Realm with six years of research. This difficulty may be compounded by the fact that some religions have integrated aspects of Realmatic Theory into their theology, though the return of the Knights Radiant and the reactivation of the Oathgates may soon lead to new knowledge.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Scadrial', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c6e0ad04-316e-41b8-8005-127a3bfea024'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Scadrial \n\nOn Scadrial, the ancient Terris were aware of Realmatic Theory and included it in their religion. This knowledge may have come from experimentation with Feruchemy, which organizes its metals into quadrants based on which Realms they affect. Their research into Realmatic Theory appears to have been an ongoing affair; when he met Alendi, the Worldbringer Kwaan was studying the Cognitive aspects of trees. Much of this knowledge appears to have been lost when Rashek destroyed the Terris religion, though at least some of it was retained by the First Generation of the kandra. Sazed included some basic information on Realmatic Theory in the Words of Founding. Since the Catacendre, the Terris have been experimenting with the Feruchemical metals that store Spiritual properties, but refuse to speak of those powers with non-Terris. The kandra and the Set have also been conducting research and have likewise been keeping it quiet. As a result of this secrecy, the people of the Elendel Basin at-large seem to have little more knowledge of Realmatic Theory than they received in the Words of Founding. However, this situation may soon change as the people of the Basin begin to interact with the Southern Scadrians.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Scadrial', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c6e0ad04-316e-41b8-8005-127a3bfea024'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - The people of Southern Scadrial have a much more advanced understanding of Realmatic Theory. Ten years after the Catacendre, Kelsier arrived in their lands and gave them the tools and knowledge needed to make unsealed brassminds. After he left, the Southern Scadrians were able to use what they knew to figure out how to make unsealed metalminds for all abilities in the Metallic Arts. They have been unable to create unsealed metalminds that grant more than three abilities, suggesting that the Realmatic principles involved become more complex as more abilities are added to the metalmind.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sel', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4fa98d50-364d-45c9-b613-9636893270b7'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Sel \n\nThe people of Sel have developed the most advanced knowledge of Realmatic Theory of any planet in the cosmere. The MaiPon learned much about Realmatic Theory and how it relates to Forgery by study and observation and are aware of concepts like Identity and Connection.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sel', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4fa98d50-364d-45c9-b613-9636893270b7'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - The Ire, and perhaps other pre-Reod Elantrians, similarly had an advanced understanding of Realmatic Theory.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Silverlight', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0a6c2b51-d354-4602-9573-5124e99bef74'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Silverlight \nWell before the True Desolation, the city of Silverlight was founded. Located entirely in the Cognitive Realm, Silverlight is home to many worldhoppers who have settled down as well as several people who live their entire lives there.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Silverlight', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0a6c2b51-d354-4602-9573-5124e99bef74'}, page_content="Realmatic Theory - Located as it is in the Cognitive Realm, most of Silverlight's residents are aware of the mechanics of the cosmere. Additionally, Silverlight is also home to several universities with scholars who study the cosmere, at least one of which was founded by Khriss."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Development', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1c94df08-6c26-4e5c-9b8b-a42b4bbaccf3'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory -  Development \nThe inspiration for Realmatic Theory comes from a number of real-world philosophies. Those philosophies include  Plato’s theory of the forms, Shinto beliefs,, and Spinoza. Plato’s theory of forms is the original concept for the Realms. The theory of forms states that the physical world is merely an imitation of the ideal essences of all things. This true ideal matches up with the Spiritual Realm, and the human perception of ideals matches up with the Cognitive Realm. While Plato’s philosophy only includes two forms, Brandon uses three. The idea that everything has a spren comes from Shinto beliefs. Spinoza’s influence is in God being in everything and everything being made of one substance.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Development', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Realmatic Theory', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1c94df08-6c26-4e5c-9b8b-a42b4bbaccf3'}, page_content='Realmatic Theory - Brandon’s interpretation of this is the Shards’ Investiture permeating everything in the cosmere. Other, more minor influences include Jung in the concept of Connection, idealism,, and the ship of Theseus thought experiment. The large number of philosophical influences on Realmatic Theory and the cosmere is because Brandon finds philosophy interesting. He took many philosophy classes in college. Realmatic Theory was first used in Dragonsteel Prime, Brandon’s second book set in the cosmere. The opening chapters include someone learning about the three Realms in a classroom. As Brandon wrote more cosmere books, he noticed patterns in the themes. He began to create a common energy source for the magic systems to use. Linking the books and creating the cosmere grew naturally from those themes and connections. Within the currently published cosmere, the term Realmatic Theory has only been used three times: once by the Ire, once by Shalash, and once by Design. Khriss has used the phrase "Realmatic Transition" in the Words of Radiance Ars Arcanum to describe the Surge of Transportation. She also used the phrase "Realmic transition" once in the essay on the Taldain system to describe how sand mastery works. The difference, if any, between these two terms is as yet unknown.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Knights Radiant', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '52be1c2e-9553-4ead-b65a-fb04daa67c29'}, page_content='Knights Radiant - The Knights Radiant (Listener: Neshua Kadal) were an organization of Surgebinders on Roshar. Their Orders were centered at Urithiru, but they lived all across Alethela, the Silver Kingdom who had to maintain the arts of war.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Knights Radiant', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '52be1c2e-9553-4ead-b65a-fb04daa67c29'}, page_content='Knights Radiant - They considered it their duty and privilege to stay vigilant for Desolations. It is commonly believed that they betrayed mankind on the Day of Recreance, and were then referred to as the Lost Radiants. Their symbol was a golden hourglass shape, of eight spheres connected with two at the center.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bb38c8aa-f5b8-4613-a10f-abbee4b13eaa'}, page_content="Knights Radiant -  History \n\nThe first Surgebinders came to be as a result of spren trying to imitate what Honor had given his Heralds. The spren formed bonds with the mankind to give them Surgebinding abilities. Honor was surprised by their coming, because he hadn't taught it to his Heralds. These Surgebinders were later formed into the ten orders of the Knights Radiant by the Herald Ishi'Elin, for the purpose of watching for the coming Desolations, and helping men fight, then rebuild the society from the destruction of the Desolations, and they adopted the city of Urithiru as their center of power. This formalized system was in place by at least the Sixth Epoch, Year 31."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'bb38c8aa-f5b8-4613-a10f-abbee4b13eaa'}, page_content='Knights Radiant - For a long time, they maintained their duty, until eventually they abandoned it on what is now known as the Day of Recreance, and possibly even turned against their wards, as some legends say. This betrayal caused many spren to die, their corpses becoming tools of destruction, and as a result they stopped granting humanity Surgebinding. In recent times, sensing an impending danger, the spren started returning to mankind as an act of self-preservation. People all over Roshar started gaining Surgebinding powers by forming Nahel bonds with the spren in the following years. At the beginning of the year 1174, Urithiru was reclaimed, and the Knights Radiant were re-founded with initially four members; Kaladin, Shallan Davar, Dalinar Kholin, and Renarin Kholin.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Radiant Orders and Powers', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e8ef5f57-5e56-4869-ac8b-46e35ef42ea2'}, page_content='Knights Radiant -  Radiant Orders and Powers\n\nThe Knights Radiant comprised ten different Orders, some of which had several hundred members. Each Order had two Surges associated with it, and each Surge was used by two different Orders.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Radiant Orders and Powers', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e8ef5f57-5e56-4869-ac8b-46e35ef42ea2'}, page_content='Knights Radiant - Scholars associated the ten Orders with the Ten Essences as well. Each order corresponded to a Herald, and all of them except the Bondsmiths roughly correspond to an Unmade, though it is not entirely a one to one relationship. Order of Windrunners\nWindrunners bond with honorspren, which gives them the ability to use the Surges of Adhesion and Gravitation. The combination of these two Surges results in the powers known as the Three Lashings. Windrunners are associated with the sapphire polestone, the essence of Zephyr, and the Herald Jezrien. Order of Skybreakers\nSkybreakers bond with highspren, which gives them the ability to use the Surges of Gravitation and Division. Skybreakers are associated with the smokestone polestone, the essence of Vapor, and the Herald Nale. Order of Dustbringers\nDustbringers - or as they prefer, Releasers - bond with ashspren, which gives them the ability to use the Surges of Division and Abrasion. Their powers tend to be destructive. Dustbringers are associated with the ruby polestone, the essence of Spark, and the Herald Chanarach. Order of Edgedancers\nEdgedancers bond with cultivationspren, which gives them the ability to use the Surges of Abrasion and Progression. Edgedancers are associated with the diamond polestone, the essence of Lucentia, and the Herald Vedel. Order of Truthwatchers\nTruthwatchers bond with mistspren, gaining the ability to use the Surges of Progression and Illumination. The surge of Progression grants the Truthwatchers the power of regrowth, which allows them to heal people, and at least two Truthwatchers have demonstrated the ability to foresee future events. Truthwatchers are associated with the emerald polestone, the essence of Pulp, and the Herald Pailiah. Order of Lightweavers\nLightweavers bond with Cryptics, or liespren, which gives them the ability to use the Surges of Illumination and Transformation. They can create illusions and have the inherent ability to Soulcast. Lightweavers are associated with the garnet polestone, the essence of Blood, and the Herald Shalash. Order of Elsecallers\nElsecallers bond with inkspren, which gives them the ability to use the Surges of Transformation and Transportation.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Radiant Orders and Powers', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e8ef5f57-5e56-4869-ac8b-46e35ef42ea2'}, page_content="Knights Radiant - They have the inherent ability to Soulcast. They have the closest affiliation with Shadesmar out of all the orders. Elsecallers are associated with the zircon polestone, the essence of Tallow, and the Herald Battar. Order of Willshapers\nWillshapers bond with Reachers, also known as lightspren, which gives them the ability to use the Surges of Transportation and Cohesion. Willshapers are associated with the amethyst polestone, the essence of Foil, and the Herald Kalak. Order of Stonewards\nStonewards bond with peakspren, gaining the ability to use the Surges of Cohesion and Tension. Stonewards are associated with the topaz polestone, the essence of Talus, and the Herald Talenel. Order of Bondsmiths\nBondsmiths bond with three unique spren—the Stormfather, the Sibling, and the Nightwatcher—which gives them the ability to use the Surges of Tension and Adhesion. Bondsmiths are associated with the heliodor polestone, the essence of Sinew, and the Herald Ishar. The Knights Radiant also used Shardblades and Shardplate, which were etched with glyphs and glowed a different color according to the Order they were a part of. Not all Radiants have access to Shards and many Orders don't receive them until they have sworn the higher Ideals."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Squires', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4354458d-28f0-45f7-b219-196de32432e9'}, page_content='Knights Radiant -  Squires \nMany orders of the knights are able to grant the ability to use Stormlight and some of their Surges to people, possibly those capable of becoming knights themselves. It appears that potential squires must have a mindset that matches at least partly with the requirements of the order. For Windrunners this appears to be a mental state geared to protection.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Squires', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4354458d-28f0-45f7-b219-196de32432e9'}, page_content="Knights Radiant - Many squires recite the First Ideal before gaining Surgebinding, but this is not required. Each order follows a path and with a Knight willing to help the first steps can be taken before Bonding a spren themselves. This shows the spren what people are good candidates for each order, and reducing the chance that a spren will die from failed oaths. Time as a Squire also allows a person to practice Surgebinding before gaining a Nahel bond. It is possible for a person to remain a squire their whole life, or to be a squire of one order and bond a spren from another. Using a mix of other Investiture (such as Feruchemy and Hemalurgy), a Surgebinder could hack the magic and be a squire of multiple Orders at once. The powers of a squire are tied to a particular Radiant and their spren, and without their presence, a squire cannot draw in Stormlight to Surgebind, even if another full Knight of the same order is present. Squires must be within approximately fifty miles of their Radiant to use their powers, although they begin to weaken once they are separated by thirty miles or more. If their Radiant were to suddenly separate from them, such as by using an Oathgate, a squire's powers would last between one to two hours. While it has been said that some orders may not have squires, the Windrunners, Skybreakers, Dustbringers, Lightweavers, Willshapers, Stonewards, and Bondsmiths are known to have squires."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Immortal Words', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9f151e7b-cb51-49ae-b69c-2faba888055b'}, page_content="Knights Radiant -  Immortal Words \n\nThe Ideals of the Knights Radiant, known as the Immortal Words, serve as a guide for the Radiants' actions and lives. Each order of Radiants has five Ideals, though different Radiants from the same order may swear an ideal with slightly different words and Lightweavers swear more individualized truths instead of ideals. The wording of the First Ideal, however, is exact and is used by all orders, including the Lightweavers. It appears that it is not necessary to speak the First Ideal as a complete uninterrupted phrase, as when Navani Kholin spoke them to bond the Sibling, she spread the three sentences throughout the length of a conversation, and though he was unable to complete the Ideal before being killed, Elhokar Kholin stuttered and repeated its words. The First Ideal acts as a motto and guide for the Radiants as a whole, and is known as the Ideal of Radiance by the Skybreakers, who may have carried the name over from the ancient Radiants. The unique Ideals of each order are designed as a progression that develops a Radiant's character toward the central concepts of their order."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Immortal Words', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9f151e7b-cb51-49ae-b69c-2faba888055b'}, page_content="Knights Radiant - The Stormfather and Cultivation have some discretion in deciding whether or not a Radiant has progressed enough that their oath can be accepted, though this discretion appears to be limited. It is unclear whether or not the Stormfather had this ability prior to Honor's Splintering, but it seems likely it was instead Honor's decision at this time. A Bondsmith may also be able to accept the oaths of other orders. As a Radiant swears additional Ideals, they gain their Shardblade and Shardplate (though the Ideal at which these are received is not the same for all orders) and become more efficient in their use of Stormlight. Additionally, some orders cannot use one of their Surges until they swear a higher Ideal. Swearing the Fifth Ideal, also known as the Final Ideal, makes the Nahel bond between Radiant and spren so strong that it can only be broken by death; until that point, there are apparently safe ways to break the bond. Swearing the Fifth Ideal is generally not necessary to be considered a full Knight Radiant and is such a difficult process that the Order of the Skybreakers has not had someone swear the Fifth Ideal for centuries. Ideals must be sworn in order, even if a Radiant is ready to swear a higher ideal than the one they cannot currently swear. Radiants must also be ready to swear the ideals, and cannot just say the words to advance."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Vorinism', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd9724383-a500-4a9d-9a97-816dce1acffb'}, page_content='Knights Radiant -  Vorinism \nIn Vorinism, the fall of the Knights Radiant was called the Day of Recreance. They are taught to be evil people who turned against humanity, and are thus given the moniker "Lost Radiants."\n\nVorinism taught that the Knights Radiant betrayed the people. It was taught that their powers were not real, but elaborate tricks, and that they only pretended to have a holy calling. The "evidence" for this was that the powers could not be reproduced. There are legends that teach about the souls of the Knights Radiant arriving during highstorms in order to steal spheres left out to be infused.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Vorinism', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd9724383-a500-4a9d-9a97-816dce1acffb'}, page_content='Knights Radiant - This was used as a way to explain both spheres being stolen by thieves in the dark, and how the winds of the highstorm often tore baskets off their posts and flung them into the distance.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Notable Knights Radiant', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3b730953-cc40-4b42-a2b2-bdb717b44da6'}, page_content='Knights Radiant -  Notable Knights Radiant '), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Knights Radiant', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c4d70b3a-c8d0-4513-8662-daa990b07f64'}, page_content='Knights Radiant -  Trivia \n Brandon intended for sets of Ideals across Orders (e.g. the Third Ideal) to have a theme, though not all oaths will follow the pattern.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kelsier', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '346ed3ce-f41b-4718-b552-bb68d5844a5b'}, page_content="Kelsier - Kelsier is a half-skaa Mistborn from Scadrial. He is stern and intense, but always smiling; another act of rebellion against the Lord Ruler's oppression."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kelsier', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '346ed3ce-f41b-4718-b552-bb68d5844a5b'}, page_content="Kelsier - He hates injustice and takes this hatred to the extreme, which originally resulted in him being unable to see good in any of the nobility. This was changed by Vin who fell in love with Elend Venture. Kelsier went on to save Elend's life from an inquisitor. His late wife Mare collected pre-Ascension memorabilia, and he keeps one piece, a drawing of a flower, to inspire his crew. Kelsier is the younger brother of Marsh, who is disappointed at Kelsier's apparent lack of direction or purpose until Kelsier leads the skaa rebellion."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance and Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9a485834-2d12-4575-8e97-b057ff224e66'}, page_content="Kelsier -  Appearance and Personality \n\nKelsier is tall and hawk-faced and has light-blonde hair and hazel eyes; he has a multitude of scars crossing both arms from his time in the Pits of Hathsin. He usually wears a nobleman's suit (a colored vest with dark trousers and a coat), and during the night he wears his mistcloak."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance and Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9a485834-2d12-4575-8e97-b057ff224e66'}, page_content="Kelsier - He is almost always late to gatherings, which he attributes to always having somewhere better to be. He always smiles and projects an excited and positive attitude, which is particularly unusual in the skaa underground. He does this in order to fight the Lord Ruler's oppression of all the skaa, wanting to have one thing which cannot be taken away from him. He hates all of the nobility and tends to believe that all of them are to blame for the plight of the skaa, although near the end of his life this attitude changes due to Vin's insistence that Elend is different and that not all the nobles should be fought, although his views did not fully change, and he retained his prejudice and distrust. He has an imposing presence and is a natural leader, easily taking charge and swaying even the downtrodden skaa of Luthadel into joining the rebellion with his charming personality. If Kelsier orders a person around, it is a sign of affection. Kelsier is a psychopath, or at least has some psychopathic tendencies. He shows little empathy or fear, as well as a high ego, and is frequently quick to resort to using violence—often lethal violence—to solve problems, even when doing so clearly won't actually help the people he is supposedly trying to help. He is arrogant and very driven which, combined with his power, makes him incredibly dangerous; he is willing to go extremely far to achieve his goals—for example, he would be willing to use Hemalurgy on a large scale to create powerful Allomancers if ultimately necessary to protect Scadrial from other forces in the cosmere—though is not quite as utilitarian as Taravangian. Perhaps as a result of his egotism and arrogance, several of his plans involve setting himself up as a powerful, mysterious, or even divine figure. He is a great agent of chaos and is very good at tearing things down and messing with what other people want. There is a darkness to him that other heroes, such as Kaladin, would fight but that Kelsier instead embraces and is so ruthless that, in a fight with other notable people from the cosmere, he would be the most likely to win; even Hoid considers him incredibly dangerous. Had his life gone differently, he could have been an outright evil person and, outside the context of the Final Empire, would likely be a villain."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3d56e0dd-5b83-4d27-b4ad-efaf1f0202e3'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Attributes and Abilities \n\n Allomancy \nKelsier is a Mistborn, so he can burn every Allomantic metal, although he is particularly proficient with the external physical metals iron and steel. He is capable of using them with a high degree of precision to control the momentum and rotation of dozens of pieces of metal simultaneously.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3d56e0dd-5b83-4d27-b4ad-efaf1f0202e3'}, page_content="Kelsier - He once used them in his fight with a Steel Inquisitor, so the metals acted like they were alive, twitching and flying through the air to cut and distract the Steel Inquisitor. He lacks finesse in the external mental abilities of zinc and brass as he tends to create large changes in emotional states as opposed to the more subtle Soothing abilities of Breeze, although he can affect a relatively large mass of people. He is quite proficient at pewter dragging and has enough practice to maintain it for hours and still maintain a fair amount of clarity afterwards. He lost these abilities in death and has not recovered them. Sliver \nAfter Kelsier died, he became a Cognitive Shadow through the Well of Ascension, making him able to resist the pull of the Beyond. After Holding and releasing the Shard of Preservation, Kelsier became a Sliver. Preservation \nKelsier held Preservation for a short time but could not properly use it because of his recent rebirth as a Cognitive Shadow and his goals did not match well with Preservation's Intent. Hemalurgy \nKelsier has a Hemalurgic spike in his right eye socket, which he acquires sometime after the Catacendre. As a result, he has both regular vision and the steelsight that Inquisitors used, allowing him to see via both normal light and trace metals. This spike pins his soul to his bones. Devotion \nKelsier has an unknown Seon which he uses to communicate with his Ghostbloods on Scadrial."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Allomancy', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '09b0a301-4a41-4541-9b57-beeb87ca82e8'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Allomancy \nKelsier is a Mistborn, so he can burn every Allomantic metal, although he is particularly proficient with the external physical metals iron and steel. He is capable of using them with a high degree of precision to control the momentum and rotation of dozens of pieces of metal simultaneously.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Allomancy', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '09b0a301-4a41-4541-9b57-beeb87ca82e8'}, page_content='Kelsier - He once used them in his fight with a Steel Inquisitor, so the metals acted like they were alive, twitching and flying through the air to cut and distract the Steel Inquisitor. He lacks finesse in the external mental abilities of zinc and brass as he tends to create large changes in emotional states as opposed to the more subtle Soothing abilities of Breeze, although he can affect a relatively large mass of people. He is quite proficient at pewter dragging and has enough practice to maintain it for hours and still maintain a fair amount of clarity afterwards. He lost these abilities in death and has not recovered them.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sliver', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e06d6dc1-cd46-437e-a2ed-ba0e62e555e8'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Sliver \nAfter Kelsier died, he became a Cognitive Shadow through the Well of Ascension, making him able to resist the pull of the Beyond. After Holding and releasing the Shard of Preservation, Kelsier became a Sliver.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Preservation', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '927e9677-b15b-4bf1-b7d5-8f226a135122'}, page_content="Kelsier -  Preservation \nKelsier held Preservation for a short time but could not properly use it because of his recent rebirth as a Cognitive Shadow and his goals did not match well with Preservation's Intent."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hemalurgy', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1e289e0f-1260-40b7-a279-6e45684a4126'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Hemalurgy \nKelsier has a Hemalurgic spike in his right eye socket, which he acquires sometime after the Catacendre. As a result, he has both regular vision and the steelsight that Inquisitors used, allowing him to see via both normal light and trace metals.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hemalurgy', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '1e289e0f-1260-40b7-a279-6e45684a4126'}, page_content='Kelsier - This spike pins his soul to his bones.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Devotion', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'df09ee55-bdff-4f74-ba2c-efdd13699ad3'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Devotion \nKelsier has an unknown Seon which he uses to communicate with his Ghostbloods on Scadrial.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd906ff80-821e-4534-ade9-a8b622d693ae'}, page_content='Kelsier -  History \n\n Early Life \n\nBorn to a noble father and skaa mother, his mother kept both Kelsier and Marsh alive by pretending that she was noble to their father so that their children would be considered merely illegitimate noblemen instead of half-breeds; however, their father eventually found out. Thus Kelsier\'s mother was killed, and because of this, the brothers have a deep hatred of noblemen. Kelsier then made his living as a thief, becoming famous throughout Luthadel. He teamed up with the escaped Plantation skaa Dockson and the Tineye Mare, whom he married. They were extremely successful. Kelsier later said that "he had more Money than he could Spend" however, after a failed attempt at stealing from the Lord Ruler in his secret room inside Kredik Shaw, he was sent to the atium mines in the Pits of Hathsin. There he spent his time believing that his wife Mare had betrayed him to the Lord Ruler until he witnessed his wife being beaten to death by guards after she gifted her Atium bead to him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd906ff80-821e-4534-ade9-a8b622d693ae'}, page_content='Kelsier - He then "Snapped", becoming a Mistborn.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd906ff80-821e-4534-ade9-a8b622d693ae'}, page_content="Kelsier - Using Allomancy he was able to escape the Pits. Kelsier was then trained by a Mistborn named Gemmel and they traveled to the far north of the Western Dominance to a city called Mantiz where Kelsier fought and killed the Mistborn Antillius Shezler. From the skaa in Keep Shezler he heard rumors of the Eleventh metal. Kelsier sought and eventually found the Eleventh metal as he believed it would help him to defeat the Lord Ruler. Recruiting his Crew \n\nAfter discovering the Eleventh Metal Kelsier started to prepare his plan by hiring the Kandra OreSeur. Then he killed the noble Lord Renoux and let OreSeur impersonate him. He met with Yeden the leader of the skaa rebellion and made Yeden hire him to bring down the Final Empire. On Kelsier's way back to Luthadel, he made a stop at the farm of Lord Themos Tresting to talk with the farm skaa. When Lord Tresting attempted to rape a skaa girl, Kelsier saved her, killing Tresting and all his servants and soldiers in the process. He burned down the manor and purposely departed in a way that forced the skaa to join the rebellion. When he arrived in Luthadel, he first reunited with his old partner and best friend Dockson. Dockson told Kelsier about a young Allomancer girl Marsh had discovered whom he suspected was a Mistborn. Kelsier and Dockson went to see her first hand; they watched Vin Soothe an obligator during Camon's scheme, confirming that she was at least a Soother. After Camon and Vin left, Kelsier realized that the ministry had already discovered that Camon was a thief and only played along to find the crew's hideout. A Steel Inquisitor had been present, discovering Vin's Allomancy. The Inquisitor and some soliders followed Camon to find his hideout to wipe out his crew, but Kelsier lured the Inquisitor away by using his own Allomancy while Dockson took out the soldiers. They went to the hideout themselves just in time to save Vin from Camon. Kelsier knocked out Camon with Steelpushes and gave control over the crew to Milev. He forced the rest of the crew to leave, only leaving Vin. Kelsier's suspicions that Vin was a Mistborn were confirmed when he saw that she was able to burn zinc. Kelsier offered to let her to join his crew. Vin didn't trust him but agreed in order to learn how to use Allomancy. Later, Kelsier invited a team of the best thieves in the city to a gathering in Camon's safe house. He introduced them and Vin to Yeden and explained his plan to destroy the Final Empire and kill the Lord Ruler. Breeze, Ham, Clubs, and Clubs' nephew Spook joined his crew. While initially hostile, in the end Kelsier's brother Marsh joined, and together the crew developed a plan to defeat the Final Empire."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd906ff80-821e-4534-ade9-a8b622d693ae'}, page_content='Kelsier - The plan was to secretly build up an army of twenty thousand trained skaa soldiers in the Arguois caverns while at the same time causing confusion and distrust in the nobility to cause a house war. Once their army was trained and the houses grew unstable enough, they would send a part of their army to attack the Pits of Hathsin, forcing the garrison of Luthadel to go and defend the Pits. With the garrison gone and the nobility weakened by the war, the rest of the army then could take over Luthadel. Then Yeden would gain control of the city and the crew would receive the Lord Ruler\'s atium stash as payment. Breeze would recruit men for the rebellion, Ham would train them in the Arguois caverns, Dockson would direct the operation\'s finances, Clubs would hide the group\'s Allomancy with copperclouds, OreSeur in the role of Lord Renoux would buy the necessary equipment, Marsh would infiltrate the Steel Ministry posing as an obligator, Kelsier would use his Mistborn power to make attacks on the nobility to create tension between the houses, and Vin would gather information in the noble court posing as Renoux\'s niece Valette. Kelsier also wanted to try kill the Lord Ruler with the Eleventh Metal as a "voluntary bonus". The Skaa Rebellion  \nTo put the plan in motion, Kelsier first targeted Keep Venture, as House Venture was currently the most powerful house in Luthadel and an attack on it would have the greatest impact. Kelsier killed eight Hazekillers, stole a bag of atium, and made sure that it became known that a Mistborn had attacked a Great House, something forbidden by an unspoken agreement between the houses. He gifted Vin a mistcloak and started to teach her Allomancy. Vin expected that Kelsier would use his knowledge to control her, but to her surprise, he openly explained her the eight basic metals. Kelsier let Vin jump over the city walls as an exercise for steel and iron and was surprised how voluntarily she did it, remembering his own training. Outside the city, they saw a Mistwraith. Back at the city gates Kelsier introduced Vin to Sazed. Realizing Vin didn\'t trust him, he told her that in his crew they trust each other. He offered to teach her about gold and atium, gave her the money he took from Camon, and allowed her to leave, as he didn\'t want to force anybody into his crew. Vin decided to stay in order to see if he told the truth about trusting others. In the following months, Kelsier himself took on many roles to further the plan, acting as a beacon to the repressed skaa, assisting in recruitment, attacking many noblemen to increase the tensions between the Great Houses,, collecting information by purchasing it from informants, and even posing as an informant in order to provide misinformation to noblemen. He continued training Vin and was surprised by her quick progress. Though they suffered many setbacks, Kelsier\'s leadership allowed the rebellion to attain an army of sufficient size to hold Luthadel. Death \n\nWhen several skaa from the rebellion were about to be executed, Kelsier attempts to save them. He is confronted by a Steel Inquisitor, which he eventually manages to defeat by beheading him with the Inquisitor\'s own obsidian axe. However, Kelsier is then confronted by the Lord Ruler, who backhands him across the face and then stabs him in the chest with a spear, killing him. Kelsier later reveals in his letter to Vin that he had intended to use the Eleventh Metal to destroy the Lord Ruler but could not discover how to use it in his fight. After his death, OreSeur takes his bones and appears before several groups of skaa, making them believe that Kelsier survived somehow. This results in the skaa considering him a god, leading to the founding of the Church of the Survivor, which refers to Kelsier as  "Lord of the Mists". Vin also became a major religious figure in the wake of his death, as the Survivorists consider her Kelsier\'s heir. TenSoon learned the location of his bones from OreSeur, and used them to convince the people of Luthadel to hide in the caverns after King Penrod was corrupted by Ruin. Time in the Cognitive Realm \n\nImmediately after his death, Kelsier arrived in the Cognitive Realm and met Preservation. He then asked Preservation if they are God, and after being told yes he promptly punched Preservation in the face. Then he found the power at the Well of Ascension and became trapped there with Ruin, though merging with the power of the Well allowed him to become a Cognitive Shadow and resist the pull of the Beyond. While he was in the Well, Hoid passed by and Kelsier essentially challenges him to a fight that Kelsier ultimately loses. He feels Ruin\'s presence during his time in the Well. Once he is freed from the Well along with Ruin, he initially travels around through the Cognitive version of Luthadel, seeking out his friends. He finds Vin and Ham near the steps of Keep Venture and also learned that Dockson had died in the Battle of Luthadel. He walks past Luthadel towards the lake of the same name, near which he finds Khriss and Nazh. They question him on Preservation\'s appearance after learning he has spoken directly with the Shard, and then continue their discussion onto other topics. Khriss mentions the Ire which sets Kelsier onto his next quest of finding their base of operation. During his journey to find the Ire, he runs into Ruin and has a discussion about Ruin\'s intent. After that, he left the area of the Cognitive Realm surrounding Scadrial and moved closer to finding the Ire. When he reaches their base, he moved past their guards and passed the wall into their chambers. He ultimately only took a glass orb from them after thwarting their plan to take over become the Vessel of Preservation after Leras\' death. When he returned to Scadrial he found that Preservation\'s power was significantly weakened. He also ran into Vin and was shocked to see how far she had come in the time he was away. He stayed with her for a while after that but ultimately had to leave. When Leras died and Ruin began to Splinter the Shard of Preservation, Kelsier used the Ire\'s orb to Connect with Preservation and Ascend, allowing him to protect the power and hold it until Vin could take it. Despite Preservation not usually being able to speak into the minds of other, due to some combination of Spook being near death, having a broken soul, and believing Kelsier was a god, he was able to talk to Spook. He used this opportunity to tell Spook to send a message to Vin, warning her that any spiked person could potentially be under Ruin\'s control. Secretly, however, he knew that Ruin would send Marsh to intercept the message, and was hoping that reading the message would give Marsh the information he needed to remove Vin\'s earring, which was also a Hemalurgic spike that was keeping her from taking up Preservation\'s power. When Marsh caught Vin in Luthadel, he attacked Ruin with Preservation\'s power, weakening Ruin\'s control over Marsh just enough for Marsh to rip out Vin\'s earring. With the spike removed, Kelsier encouraged her to take up the power, relinquishing it so that she can do so.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd906ff80-821e-4534-ade9-a8b622d693ae'}, page_content="Kelsier - After she and Elend are killed, Kelsier spoke with them before they moved on to the Beyond. After Sazed's Ascension and Spook's rise to political power, Kelsier began to speak with Spook about finding a way to bring himself back to the Physical Realm. As a Cognitive Shadow tied to Scadrial, it is difficult for him to travel to other planets via Shadesmar. He does not yet know the secret to overcome this limitation."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd906ff80-821e-4534-ade9-a8b622d693ae'}, page_content='Kelsier - His bones survived the Ascension of Harmony, and may have helped him regain physical form. Continued Worship Post-Catacendre \nMany years after the Catacendre, the cult which started after Kelsier\'s deception with OreSeur directly following his death has become a fully-formed religion. The Church of the Survivor, or Survivorism, is possibly the most organized of Scadrial\'s religions in this period, as well as being the clear favorite among the social elite and downtrodden alike. Steris and Marasi are both members of this religion, though Marasi admits that it is more because she was raised in it. Its central tenet is simply to survive, by any means, until you cannot survive any longer. Priests in this religion wear robes with stitching up the arms to emulate Kelsier\'s scars from the Pits of Hathsin. The "Survivor\'s Statemark" is one of the symbols of the faith. When Bleeder killed Father Bin by nailing him to a wall, it is described as a parody of the Survivor\'s Statemark, implying that the Statemark depicts the way Kelsier died, impaled by a spear. Aside from the Survivorists, there was also a whole civilization of people that worshiped Kelsier far to the south of Elendel, calling him the Sovereign. Kelsier had traveled there several years after the Catacendre, inhabiting a physical body that was spiked in the right eye, and found the Southern Scadrians slowly dying of an unexplained coldness. He helped the people there survive using his knowledge of the Metallic Arts, showing them how to make unsealed metalminds to store attributes like heat in a way that could be shared with anyone. As the Sovereign, Kelsier ruled the Southern Scadrians for a time and formed another religion that deified Metalborn, and then he left. Before leaving them, he created the Bands of Mourning, a collection of unsealed metalminds forged together and containing all kinds of attributes in extremely large quantities. He hid the artifact away somewhere in the north and then disappeared. Cosmere-wide Activity \nKelsier is known as Thaidakar to the Ghostbloods, a secret society that operates on several planets, including Roshar. Kelsier is the leader and presumed founder of the organization, which Mraize calls "the most powerful organization in all the cosmere." He is referred to by Hoid as "the Lord of Scars." Kelsier is Iyatil\'s master. While he is incapable of leaving Scadrial in person, he uses an "avatar" to visit the Ghostbloods on Roshar.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd906ff80-821e-4534-ade9-a8b622d693ae'}, page_content="Kelsier - He appears to be using the Ghostbloods to find a way for him to leave Scadrial and is very interested in learning from the Heralds, particularly Kalak, as they are subject to a similar restriction. When assassinated by Szeth, Gavilar suspects Thaidakar of ordering his death. He has also worked together with Khriss. The Ghostbloods believe Kelsier to still have his Allomantic abilities, and he appears to be playing into this lie. Kelsier and Wax \nWaxillium Ladrian was a direct descendant of a close associate of Kelsier, Edgard Ladrian. As a Pathian, Wax did not worship Kelsier, but his life has nonetheless been drastically affected by the Survivor. Marsh decided to give Wax a book explaining Hemalurgy because he believed Wax was doing Kelsier's work. This book proved vital in solving the case of Bleeder. While conversing with Harmony regarding the case, Harmony said that Wax's casual way of talking to him reminded him of Kelsier. Harmony also made vague allusions to the Southern Scadrians that Kelsier once ruled as the Sovereign. Later on, a group of Southern Scadrians traveled north in search of the Sovereign's Bands of Mourning, but were captured by the Set, who decided to seek the Bands as well. Wax and his friends became embroiled in this incident in opposition to the Set, and Wax was almost killed in an encounter with them. After Marasi solved the riddle of the Bands and wielded it to escape the Set, she gave it to Wax, who wielded it and became incredibly powerful. Wax then used the artifact to defeat the Set and save the Southern Scadrian prisoners, using up a lot of the Investiture stored in the Bands. Soon afterwards, Wax accessed a coppermind contained in a coin-like Southern Scadrian medallion that Hoid had given him and saw a vision of what appeared to be Kelsier's memory of discovering the Southern Scadrians hundreds of years prior. The vision, seen from Kelsier's point of view, showed that his spiked right eye viewed the world through Allomantic lines, similar to Steel Inquisitors, while his left eye saw things normally. <div data-nosnippet>\n\n Resistance against Trell \nAt some point, Kelsier had the Ghostbloods on Scadrial work in order to resist the oncoming threat of Trell. He worked out of a safehouse in Bilming, alongside Moonlight, TwinSoul, Kaise, and Dao."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd906ff80-821e-4534-ade9-a8b622d693ae'}, page_content="Kelsier - He was hours away near Southern Scadrian when Telsin planned to send a bomb on Elendel, and tasked Moonlight, TwinSoul, and Marasi to take care of it. He also had Codenames send messages to Steris and the Ghostblood agents in the Elendel Basin, telling them to prepare for an evacuation of Elendel. After Elendel was saved, Kelsier talked with Harmony, asking him to lead Scadrial into a new technological and Metalborn age so they may be better prepared for future threats and Autonomy's return."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early Life', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '086768b3-b142-4536-ac0d-8aa7299e6999'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Early Life \n\nBorn to a noble father and skaa mother, his mother kept both Kelsier and Marsh alive by pretending that she was noble to their father so that their children would be considered merely illegitimate noblemen instead of half-breeds; however, their father eventually found out. Thus Kelsier\'s mother was killed, and because of this, the brothers have a deep hatred of noblemen. Kelsier then made his living as a thief, becoming famous throughout Luthadel. He teamed up with the escaped Plantation skaa Dockson and the Tineye Mare, whom he married. They were extremely successful. Kelsier later said that "he had more Money than he could Spend" however, after a failed attempt at stealing from the Lord Ruler in his secret room inside Kredik Shaw, he was sent to the atium mines in the Pits of Hathsin. There he spent his time believing that his wife Mare had betrayed him to the Lord Ruler until he witnessed his wife being beaten to death by guards after she gifted her Atium bead to him.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Early Life', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '086768b3-b142-4536-ac0d-8aa7299e6999'}, page_content='Kelsier - He then "Snapped", becoming a Mistborn. Using Allomancy he was able to escape the Pits. Kelsier was then trained by a Mistborn named Gemmel and they traveled to the far north of the Western Dominance to a city called Mantiz where Kelsier fought and killed the Mistborn Antillius Shezler. From the skaa in Keep Shezler he heard rumors of the Eleventh metal. Kelsier sought and eventually found the Eleventh metal as he believed it would help him to defeat the Lord Ruler.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Recruiting his Crew', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0d23c9fe-c05f-4e93-af1f-6da86f107fec'}, page_content="Kelsier -  Recruiting his Crew \n\nAfter discovering the Eleventh Metal Kelsier started to prepare his plan by hiring the Kandra OreSeur. Then he killed the noble Lord Renoux and let OreSeur impersonate him. He met with Yeden the leader of the skaa rebellion and made Yeden hire him to bring down the Final Empire. On Kelsier's way back to Luthadel, he made a stop at the farm of Lord Themos Tresting to talk with the farm skaa. When Lord Tresting attempted to rape a skaa girl, Kelsier saved her, killing Tresting and all his servants and soldiers in the process. He burned down the manor and purposely departed in a way that forced the skaa to join the rebellion. When he arrived in Luthadel, he first reunited with his old partner and best friend Dockson. Dockson told Kelsier about a young Allomancer girl Marsh had discovered whom he suspected was a Mistborn. Kelsier and Dockson went to see her first hand; they watched Vin Soothe an obligator during Camon's scheme, confirming that she was at least a Soother. After Camon and Vin left, Kelsier realized that the ministry had already discovered that Camon was a thief and only played along to find the crew's hideout. A Steel Inquisitor had been present, discovering Vin's Allomancy. The Inquisitor and some soliders followed Camon to find his hideout to wipe out his crew, but Kelsier lured the Inquisitor away by using his own Allomancy while Dockson took out the soldiers. They went to the hideout themselves just in time to save Vin from Camon. Kelsier knocked out Camon with Steelpushes and gave control over the crew to Milev. He forced the rest of the crew to leave, only leaving Vin. Kelsier's suspicions that Vin was a Mistborn were confirmed when he saw that she was able to burn zinc. Kelsier offered to let her to join his crew. Vin didn't trust him but agreed in order to learn how to use Allomancy. Later, Kelsier invited a team of the best thieves in the city to a gathering in Camon's safe house. He introduced them and Vin to Yeden and explained his plan to destroy the Final Empire and kill the Lord Ruler. Breeze, Ham, Clubs, and Clubs' nephew Spook joined his crew. While initially hostile, in the end Kelsier's brother Marsh joined, and together the crew developed a plan to defeat the Final Empire."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Recruiting his Crew', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0d23c9fe-c05f-4e93-af1f-6da86f107fec'}, page_content='Kelsier - The plan was to secretly build up an army of twenty thousand trained skaa soldiers in the Arguois caverns while at the same time causing confusion and distrust in the nobility to cause a house war. Once their army was trained and the houses grew unstable enough, they would send a part of their army to attack the Pits of Hathsin, forcing the garrison of Luthadel to go and defend the Pits.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Recruiting his Crew', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0d23c9fe-c05f-4e93-af1f-6da86f107fec'}, page_content='Kelsier - With the garrison gone and the nobility weakened by the war, the rest of the army then could take over Luthadel. Then Yeden would gain control of the city and the crew would receive the Lord Ruler\'s atium stash as payment. Breeze would recruit men for the rebellion, Ham would train them in the Arguois caverns, Dockson would direct the operation\'s finances, Clubs would hide the group\'s Allomancy with copperclouds, OreSeur in the role of Lord Renoux would buy the necessary equipment, Marsh would infiltrate the Steel Ministry posing as an obligator, Kelsier would use his Mistborn power to make attacks on the nobility to create tension between the houses, and Vin would gather information in the noble court posing as Renoux\'s niece Valette. Kelsier also wanted to try kill the Lord Ruler with the Eleventh Metal as a "voluntary bonus".'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Skaa Rebellion', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4d1b1117-f159-45df-833d-887e448229fc'}, page_content="Kelsier -  The Skaa Rebellion  \nTo put the plan in motion, Kelsier first targeted Keep Venture, as House Venture was currently the most powerful house in Luthadel and an attack on it would have the greatest impact. Kelsier killed eight Hazekillers, stole a bag of atium, and made sure that it became known that a Mistborn had attacked a Great House, something forbidden by an unspoken agreement between the houses. He gifted Vin a mistcloak and started to teach her Allomancy. Vin expected that Kelsier would use his knowledge to control her, but to her surprise, he openly explained her the eight basic metals. Kelsier let Vin jump over the city walls as an exercise for steel and iron and was surprised how voluntarily she did it, remembering his own training. Outside the city, they saw a Mistwraith. Back at the city gates Kelsier introduced Vin to Sazed. Realizing Vin didn't trust him, he told her that in his crew they trust each other. He offered to teach her about gold and atium, gave her the money he took from Camon, and allowed her to leave, as he didn't want to force anybody into his crew."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Skaa Rebellion', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4d1b1117-f159-45df-833d-887e448229fc'}, page_content="Kelsier - Vin decided to stay in order to see if he told the truth about trusting others. In the following months, Kelsier himself took on many roles to further the plan, acting as a beacon to the repressed skaa, assisting in recruitment, attacking many noblemen to increase the tensions between the Great Houses,, collecting information by purchasing it from informants, and even posing as an informant in order to provide misinformation to noblemen. He continued training Vin and was surprised by her quick progress. Though they suffered many setbacks, Kelsier's leadership allowed the rebellion to attain an army of sufficient size to hold Luthadel."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Death', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0aa8f433-87c3-437b-9b00-cb072db4f700'}, page_content="Kelsier -  Death \n\nWhen several skaa from the rebellion were about to be executed, Kelsier attempts to save them. He is confronted by a Steel Inquisitor, which he eventually manages to defeat by beheading him with the Inquisitor's own obsidian axe."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Death', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0aa8f433-87c3-437b-9b00-cb072db4f700'}, page_content='Kelsier - However, Kelsier is then confronted by the Lord Ruler, who backhands him across the face and then stabs him in the chest with a spear, killing him. Kelsier later reveals in his letter to Vin that he had intended to use the Eleventh Metal to destroy the Lord Ruler but could not discover how to use it in his fight. After his death, OreSeur takes his bones and appears before several groups of skaa, making them believe that Kelsier survived somehow. This results in the skaa considering him a god, leading to the founding of the Church of the Survivor, which refers to Kelsier as  "Lord of the Mists". Vin also became a major religious figure in the wake of his death, as the Survivorists consider her Kelsier\'s heir. TenSoon learned the location of his bones from OreSeur, and used them to convince the people of Luthadel to hide in the caverns after King Penrod was corrupted by Ruin.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Time in the Cognitive Realm', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'eae1a9ae-a90f-48b5-a00b-a5fa9bfb49b8'}, page_content="Kelsier -  Time in the Cognitive Realm \n\nImmediately after his death, Kelsier arrived in the Cognitive Realm and met Preservation. He then asked Preservation if they are God, and after being told yes he promptly punched Preservation in the face. Then he found the power at the Well of Ascension and became trapped there with Ruin, though merging with the power of the Well allowed him to become a Cognitive Shadow and resist the pull of the Beyond. While he was in the Well, Hoid passed by and Kelsier essentially challenges him to a fight that Kelsier ultimately loses. He feels Ruin's presence during his time in the Well. Once he is freed from the Well along with Ruin, he initially travels around through the Cognitive version of Luthadel, seeking out his friends. He finds Vin and Ham near the steps of Keep Venture and also learned that Dockson had died in the Battle of Luthadel. He walks past Luthadel towards the lake of the same name, near which he finds Khriss and Nazh. They question him on Preservation's appearance after learning he has spoken directly with the Shard, and then continue their discussion onto other topics. Khriss mentions the Ire which sets Kelsier onto his next quest of finding their base of operation. During his journey to find the Ire, he runs into Ruin and has a discussion about Ruin's intent. After that, he left the area of the Cognitive Realm surrounding Scadrial and moved closer to finding the Ire. When he reaches their base, he moved past their guards and passed the wall into their chambers. He ultimately only took a glass orb from them after thwarting their plan to take over become the Vessel of Preservation after Leras' death. When he returned to Scadrial he found that Preservation's power was significantly weakened. He also ran into Vin and was shocked to see how far she had come in the time he was away. He stayed with her for a while after that but ultimately had to leave. When Leras died and Ruin began to Splinter the Shard of Preservation, Kelsier used the Ire's orb to Connect with Preservation and Ascend, allowing him to protect the power and hold it until Vin could take it. Despite Preservation not usually being able to speak into the minds of other, due to some combination of Spook being near death, having a broken soul, and believing Kelsier was a god, he was able to talk to Spook. He used this opportunity to tell Spook to send a message to Vin, warning her that any spiked person could potentially be under Ruin's control. Secretly, however, he knew that Ruin would send Marsh to intercept the message, and was hoping that reading the message would give Marsh the information he needed to remove Vin's earring, which was also a Hemalurgic spike that was keeping her from taking up Preservation's power. When Marsh caught Vin in Luthadel, he attacked Ruin with Preservation's power, weakening Ruin's control over Marsh just enough for Marsh to rip out Vin's earring. With the spike removed, Kelsier encouraged her to take up the power, relinquishing it so that she can do so."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Time in the Cognitive Realm', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'eae1a9ae-a90f-48b5-a00b-a5fa9bfb49b8'}, page_content="Kelsier - After she and Elend are killed, Kelsier spoke with them before they moved on to the Beyond. After Sazed's Ascension and Spook's rise to political power, Kelsier began to speak with Spook about finding a way to bring himself back to the Physical Realm. As a Cognitive Shadow tied to Scadrial, it is difficult for him to travel to other planets via Shadesmar."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Time in the Cognitive Realm', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'eae1a9ae-a90f-48b5-a00b-a5fa9bfb49b8'}, page_content='Kelsier - He does not yet know the secret to overcome this limitation. His bones survived the Ascension of Harmony, and may have helped him regain physical form.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Continued Worship Post-Catacendre', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c3d21449-b6ed-4e7f-9cda-1bb58b82b810'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Continued Worship Post-Catacendre \nMany years after the Catacendre, the cult which started after Kelsier\'s deception with OreSeur directly following his death has become a fully-formed religion. The Church of the Survivor, or Survivorism, is possibly the most organized of Scadrial\'s religions in this period, as well as being the clear favorite among the social elite and downtrodden alike. Steris and Marasi are both members of this religion, though Marasi admits that it is more because she was raised in it. Its central tenet is simply to survive, by any means, until you cannot survive any longer. Priests in this religion wear robes with stitching up the arms to emulate Kelsier\'s scars from the Pits of Hathsin. The "Survivor\'s Statemark" is one of the symbols of the faith. When Bleeder killed Father Bin by nailing him to a wall, it is described as a parody of the Survivor\'s Statemark, implying that the Statemark depicts the way Kelsier died, impaled by a spear. Aside from the Survivorists, there was also a whole civilization of people that worshiped Kelsier far to the south of Elendel, calling him the Sovereign.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Continued Worship Post-Catacendre', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c3d21449-b6ed-4e7f-9cda-1bb58b82b810'}, page_content='Kelsier - Kelsier had traveled there several years after the Catacendre, inhabiting a physical body that was spiked in the right eye, and found the Southern Scadrians slowly dying of an unexplained coldness. He helped the people there survive using his knowledge of the Metallic Arts, showing them how to make unsealed metalminds to store attributes like heat in a way that could be shared with anyone. As the Sovereign, Kelsier ruled the Southern Scadrians for a time and formed another religion that deified Metalborn, and then he left. Before leaving them, he created the Bands of Mourning, a collection of unsealed metalminds forged together and containing all kinds of attributes in extremely large quantities. He hid the artifact away somewhere in the north and then disappeared.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cosmere-wide Activity', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5370dba7-7502-49d8-b98e-3421459b6c87'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Cosmere-wide Activity \nKelsier is known as Thaidakar to the Ghostbloods, a secret society that operates on several planets, including Roshar. Kelsier is the leader and presumed founder of the organization, which Mraize calls "the most powerful organization in all the cosmere." He is referred to by Hoid as "the Lord of Scars." Kelsier is Iyatil\'s master. While he is incapable of leaving Scadrial in person, he uses an "avatar" to visit the Ghostbloods on Roshar.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cosmere-wide Activity', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5370dba7-7502-49d8-b98e-3421459b6c87'}, page_content='Kelsier - He appears to be using the Ghostbloods to find a way for him to leave Scadrial and is very interested in learning from the Heralds, particularly Kalak, as they are subject to a similar restriction. When assassinated by Szeth, Gavilar suspects Thaidakar of ordering his death. He has also worked together with Khriss. The Ghostbloods believe Kelsier to still have his Allomantic abilities, and he appears to be playing into this lie.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kelsier and Wax', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0fdf3547-6342-4cd6-8ca0-479ff8312c22'}, page_content="Kelsier -  Kelsier and Wax \nWaxillium Ladrian was a direct descendant of a close associate of Kelsier, Edgard Ladrian. As a Pathian, Wax did not worship Kelsier, but his life has nonetheless been drastically affected by the Survivor. Marsh decided to give Wax a book explaining Hemalurgy because he believed Wax was doing Kelsier's work. This book proved vital in solving the case of Bleeder. While conversing with Harmony regarding the case, Harmony said that Wax's casual way of talking to him reminded him of Kelsier. Harmony also made vague allusions to the Southern Scadrians that Kelsier once ruled as the Sovereign. Later on, a group of Southern Scadrians traveled north in search of the Sovereign's Bands of Mourning, but were captured by the Set, who decided to seek the Bands as well."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kelsier and Wax', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0fdf3547-6342-4cd6-8ca0-479ff8312c22'}, page_content="Kelsier - Wax and his friends became embroiled in this incident in opposition to the Set, and Wax was almost killed in an encounter with them. After Marasi solved the riddle of the Bands and wielded it to escape the Set, she gave it to Wax, who wielded it and became incredibly powerful. Wax then used the artifact to defeat the Set and save the Southern Scadrian prisoners, using up a lot of the Investiture stored in the Bands. Soon afterwards, Wax accessed a coppermind contained in a coin-like Southern Scadrian medallion that Hoid had given him and saw a vision of what appeared to be Kelsier's memory of discovering the Southern Scadrians hundreds of years prior. The vision, seen from Kelsier's point of view, showed that his spiked right eye viewed the world through Allomantic lines, similar to Steel Inquisitors, while his left eye saw things normally. <div data-nosnippet>"), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Resistance against Trell', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2e87f081-da46-4db5-9b73-57c938a89adb'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Resistance against Trell \nAt some point, Kelsier had the Ghostbloods on Scadrial work in order to resist the oncoming threat of Trell. He worked out of a safehouse in Bilming, alongside Moonlight, TwinSoul, Kaise, and Dao.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Resistance against Trell', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2e87f081-da46-4db5-9b73-57c938a89adb'}, page_content="Kelsier - He was hours away near Southern Scadrian when Telsin planned to send a bomb on Elendel, and tasked Moonlight, TwinSoul, and Marasi to take care of it. He also had Codenames send messages to Steris and the Ghostblood agents in the Elendel Basin, telling them to prepare for an evacuation of Elendel. After Elendel was saved, Kelsier talked with Harmony, asking him to lead Scadrial into a new technological and Metalborn age so they may be better prepared for future threats and Autonomy's return."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Titles', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '533d7a7e-8b69-4a1b-aa68-f40c51131993'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Titles \nKelsier is known by many titles, the origins of which vary. Survivor of Hathsin - A title given to him by the skaa, as he was the first person ever to escape the Pits alive. Later used as a religious title. Survivor of Mists, Survivor of Death, Survivor, Lord of the Mists - Different titles used by members of the Church of the Survivor in reference to him. Preservation\n He Who Lived - A title used by Jak\n Sovereign - Used by the Southern Scadrians without knowledge as to his actual identity. Originally assumed by Waxillium to be the Lord Ruler.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Titles', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '533d7a7e-8b69-4a1b-aa68-f40c51131993'}, page_content='Kelsier - Lord of Scars, Thaidakar - Used by the Ghostbloods. </div>'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0d2c981b-3ee8-4640-bea3-10b5759294ef'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Relationships \n\n Marsh \n\nMarsh is Kelsier’s older brother. The two of them have a strained relationship. Marsh resents Kelsier because Kelsier had success with the skaa rebellion soon after Marsh quit being its leader. Marsh doesn’t like a lot of Kelsier’s actions and the way he handles the rebellion. He strongly disapproves of the way Kelsier flippantly kills noblemen and those who serve them without a second thought. Despite his disapproval of Kelsier’s actions, Marsh is still willing to infiltrate the Steel Ministry as part of Kelsier’s plan. Despite their strained relationship, Kelsier is still grieved and angry when they find evidence of Marsh’s death. Marsh is aware of Kelsier’s current activities as a Cognitive Shadow. Vin \n\nKelsier is Vin’s mentor and teaches her to use her Allomantic abilities. Though Vin initially is wary and suspicious of him, she eventually learns to trust him, and he becomes somewhat of a father figure to her. He tries to teach Vin to smile and occasionally look on the bright side of things. They go on several outings together, including fighting Inquisitors; this leads to Vin almost dying, however, and that leads Kelsier to change how he runs the crew. Though he is killed by the Lord Ruler, he watches over Vin as a Cognitive Shadow. He feels guilty for abandoning her but does his best to help her.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0d2c981b-3ee8-4640-bea3-10b5759294ef'}, page_content="Kelsier - He eventually plays an important role in freeing her from Ruin’s influence. Gemmel \nGemmel is Kelsier's mentor in the allomantic arts, meeting each other after Kelsier escaped from his captivity in Hathsin. Gemmel frequently put Kelsier into life and death situations in order to push him to learn how to use his powers. Seeing his powers, Gemmel wondered what he unleashed upon the world in teaching Kelsier allomancy. Hoid \n\nHe and Hoid have a very antagonistic relationship one with one another, stretching back to when they first met and got into a violent fight. Merely interacting with Hoid for a brief amount of time was enough to send Kelsier into a murderous rage. Hoid greatly disapproves of Kelsier's interference with Roshar through the Ghostbloods. He considers him to be very dangerous. Hoid has also taken direct action against him, giving Wax an unsealed coppermind containing knowledge that he would rather keep hidden. At the time of meeting, he saw Kelsier as a wild card that he didn't want to deal with."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '0d2c981b-3ee8-4640-bea3-10b5759294ef'}, page_content="Kelsier - Gavilar \n\nHe and Gavilar were working against each other to an unknown extent. Their relationship was such that Gavilar was quick to believe that he was the one who ordered his murder. Ati \n\nKelsier is terrified by Ati and the power that he holds, seeing and feeling it through the Well of Ascension. Ati manipulated Kelsier for many years, grooming him in order to bring about his release. When Kelsier was in the Cognitive Realm after his release, he often would show up to him in order to mock him and his inability to do anything. Leras \n\nKelsier at first hated Leras for claiming to be God, enough to instantly punch him. For a period, he did not fully respect or believe Leras's divinity, but over time he came to respect him more. He nicknamed him Fuzz, due to his unraveled appearance. Leras is fascinated by Kelsier due to him being the first to punch him after death, and being the first to attempt to recruit him to their schemes. Thus he decides to go along with him out of curiosity. Despite being mostly cordial with Kelsier, he does disapprove of him to an extent due to how he manipulated peoples faiths during his life, playing with their hearts and treating their faith casually. He also is frustrated how much Kelsier goes against his Intent, bringing about massive societal change in how he brought about the death of the Lord Ruler, who was perfectly preserved, and played into Ruin's plans."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Marsh', 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '932cc84f-2531-43cb-8822-b6c2cf532137'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Marsh \n\nMarsh is Kelsier’s older brother. The two of them have a strained relationship. Marsh resents Kelsier because Kelsier had success with the skaa rebellion soon after Marsh quit being its leader. Marsh doesn’t like a lot of Kelsier’s actions and the way he handles the rebellion.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Marsh', 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '932cc84f-2531-43cb-8822-b6c2cf532137'}, page_content='Kelsier - He strongly disapproves of the way Kelsier flippantly kills noblemen and those who serve them without a second thought. Despite his disapproval of Kelsier’s actions, Marsh is still willing to infiltrate the Steel Ministry as part of Kelsier’s plan. Despite their strained relationship, Kelsier is still grieved and angry when they find evidence of Marsh’s death. Marsh is aware of Kelsier’s current activities as a Cognitive Shadow.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Vin', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '377e8312-0745-4328-8c33-1e4ecfe377d9'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Vin \n\nKelsier is Vin’s mentor and teaches her to use her Allomantic abilities. Though Vin initially is wary and suspicious of him, she eventually learns to trust him, and he becomes somewhat of a father figure to her. He tries to teach Vin to smile and occasionally look on the bright side of things. They go on several outings together, including fighting Inquisitors; this leads to Vin almost dying, however, and that leads Kelsier to change how he runs the crew. Though he is killed by the Lord Ruler, he watches over Vin as a Cognitive Shadow.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Vin', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '377e8312-0745-4328-8c33-1e4ecfe377d9'}, page_content='Kelsier - He feels guilty for abandoning her but does his best to help her. He eventually plays an important role in freeing her from Ruin’s influence.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Gemmel', 'order': 22, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9c29e248-7d73-4661-918a-a8482918eb5e'}, page_content="Kelsier -  Gemmel \nGemmel is Kelsier's mentor in the allomantic arts, meeting each other after Kelsier escaped from his captivity in Hathsin. Gemmel frequently put Kelsier into life and death situations in order to push him to learn how to use his powers."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Gemmel', 'order': 22, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '9c29e248-7d73-4661-918a-a8482918eb5e'}, page_content='Kelsier - Seeing his powers, Gemmel wondered what he unleashed upon the world in teaching Kelsier allomancy.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hoid', 'order': 23, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fa0183ae-6ec4-4a07-9008-88981fd6aa7d'}, page_content="Kelsier -  Hoid \n\nHe and Hoid have a very antagonistic relationship one with one another, stretching back to when they first met and got into a violent fight. Merely interacting with Hoid for a brief amount of time was enough to send Kelsier into a murderous rage. Hoid greatly disapproves of Kelsier's interference with Roshar through the Ghostbloods."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Hoid', 'order': 23, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fa0183ae-6ec4-4a07-9008-88981fd6aa7d'}, page_content="Kelsier - He considers him to be very dangerous. Hoid has also taken direct action against him, giving Wax an unsealed coppermind containing knowledge that he would rather keep hidden. At the time of meeting, he saw Kelsier as a wild card that he didn't want to deal with."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Gavilar', 'order': 24, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '637b96f7-8aac-49b9-804f-768686112f53'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Gavilar \n\nHe and Gavilar were working against each other to an unknown extent. Their relationship was such that Gavilar was quick to believe that he was the one who ordered his murder.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Ati', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '775595e1-8b63-4372-a00b-77d5d07dc4ac'}, page_content='Kelsier -  Ati \n\nKelsier is terrified by Ati and the power that he holds, seeing and feeling it through the Well of Ascension. Ati manipulated Kelsier for many years, grooming him in order to bring about his release.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Ati', 'order': 25, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '775595e1-8b63-4372-a00b-77d5d07dc4ac'}, page_content='Kelsier - When Kelsier was in the Cognitive Realm after his release, he often would show up to him in order to mock him and his inability to do anything.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Leras', 'order': 26, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4f7e8904-49ea-4ef5-a8d5-a0f042427312'}, page_content="Kelsier -  Leras \n\nKelsier at first hated Leras for claiming to be God, enough to instantly punch him. For a period, he did not fully respect or believe Leras's divinity, but over time he came to respect him more. He nicknamed him Fuzz, due to his unraveled appearance. Leras is fascinated by Kelsier due to him being the first to punch him after death, and being the first to attempt to recruit him to their schemes. Thus he decides to go along with him out of curiosity."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Leras', 'order': 26, 'parent_article': 'Kelsier', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '4f7e8904-49ea-4ef5-a8d5-a0f042427312'}, page_content="Kelsier - Despite being mostly cordial with Kelsier, he does disapprove of him to an extent due to how he manipulated peoples faiths during his life, playing with their hearts and treating their faith casually. He also is frustrated how much Kelsier goes against his Intent, bringing about massive societal change in how he brought about the death of the Lord Ruler, who was perfectly preserved, and played into Ruin's plans."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Stormfather', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '46b6942f-ae2d-4c22-af29-fb6002b0d1ee'}, page_content='Stormfather - The Stormfather is a powerful and unique spren on Roshar responsible for the highstorms. He is one of the three Bondsmith spren, and is currently bonded to Dalinar Kholin.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Stormfather', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '46b6942f-ae2d-4c22-af29-fb6002b0d1ee'}, page_content='Stormfather - To the listeners, he is known as the Rider of Storms.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance and Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8e28ab3e-b62b-4669-acbf-804a31b0127d'}, page_content='Stormfather -  Appearance and Personality \n\nThe vast majority of the time, the Stormfather is simply a disembodied presence in the skies, or an overpowering voice within the highstorm itself. On the occasions that he does show himself, he takes the form of an enormous, imperious face made out of the clouds, that seems to stretch from horizon to horizon into infinity.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Appearance and Personality', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8e28ab3e-b62b-4669-acbf-804a31b0127d'}, page_content="Stormfather - He is extremely prideful and haughty, convinced of his own power and righteousness. He does not care for humanity, only serving them and sending visions because he was bid to do so by Honor. He is particularly focused on oaths and keeping them, and does not take kindly to those who would break them. His sense of justice does not mean he demands that men follow what is right, however; to him, a genocide is not an evil deed if it was done as punishment for breaking an oath. He's often incapable of understanding human emotions and thoughts, and finds their unstable nature untrustworthy. Over time, when bonded to a human, he begins to gain a sense of empathy and understanding of people. He also begins to gain a sense of morality, understanding the harm his actions have brought to people. This does not mean he grows much more kind or gentle, though, as he still believed that the storms are his domain and his alone, and is fine with killing those who would dare to challenge him on that, like sailors on the open sea."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ae45aecb-fff1-4966-86c9-92c48405c802'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Attributes and Abilities \n\n Nature \n\nThe Stormfather is a spren, making him naturally immortal and intangible. Unlike most other spren, he is mostly present in the Physical Realm rather than Shadesmar, and thus cannot see inside of it, even though his highstorms affect it. He is one of the most powerful spren on Roshar, with an immense amount of Investiture, greater even than that of the Unmade, although he is much more restricted than them in what he can do with it. He has merged with Tanavast's Cognitive Shadow, making him something akin to a Sliver along with being a Splinter. He considers himself to be a memory men created for the Almighty, now that the god himself is gone. It is unclear how much of Tanavast is left within him, as though he seems to share some of his memories and opinions, particularly in regards to Cultivation, his standoffish nature does not match what has been seen of Tanavast. The Stormfather's unusual nature as both a spren and a Cognitive Shadow gives some additional abilities to the Bondsmith bonded to him in the present times. Dalinar Kholin is able to use it to merge the Physical, Cognitive and Spiritual Realms, creating Honor's Perpendicularity. This allows people to travel between Shadesmar and Roshar, and releases near-infinite amounts of Stormlight into the surrounding area, albeit the perpendicularity doesn't last for long. Odium refers to the whole event as Ascending. Whether this can be used in another Realm beyond the Physical is unknown. Highstorms \nThe Stormfather commands the highstorms, the powerful hurricanes that scour Roshar at regular intervals. While he ordinarily sticks to his schedule, he can summon them to a particular location if need be."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ae45aecb-fff1-4966-86c9-92c48405c802'}, page_content="Stormfather - The highstorms also grant him the ability to summon Stormlight, although he cannot do so outside of a highstorm. While he rides the storms, and can perceive everything within them, his consciousness is not restricted to them -- he is capable of speaking to Dalinar from great distances, and unlike other Radiant spren, he does not need to remain close to him. This being said, he does not have absolute control over everything that happens within his storms, and he's incapable of stopping singers from using it to bond with spren, even voidspren. Within a highstorm, the Stormfather is capable of communicating with people, appearing as an enormous face and speaking in a thunderous voice. Doing so slows down time greatly. Visions \n\nThe Stormfather is capable of sending people visions, so long as his target is in an area experiencing a highstorm. Whether or not a person is currently awake or asleep is irrelevant, and it appears that the vision cannot be resisted. The visions can be given to more than one person at a time, as long as all other than his bonded Surgebinder are within a highstorm. His bonded Surgebinder is also able to enter a vision without a highstorm and is able to bring in others with them outside of a highstorm as long as they are touching the Bondsmith. When speaking to others inside of a vision, accents might not carry over. The visions the Stormfather sends out have been bestowed upon him by Honor near the end of the Shard's life, to be given to those who would be best served by them, such as possible future Bondsmiths. They play out as a pre-recorded, heavily interactive scenes, set in another place and another time. The target of the vision assumes the role of someone who lived in that time and place, and the people conjured up by the vision interact with them as though they were that person. The target cannot summon their Shardblade, although they are capable of using their Surgebinding abilities. They can, however, feel pain and attempt to act out their actions within a vision, which sometimes requires that their physical bodies be restrained."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ae45aecb-fff1-4966-86c9-92c48405c802'}, page_content='Stormfather - They will speak the language matching the time period and location of the vision, even if they aren\'t normally able to speak it. While the Stormfather ordinarily has a cycle of visions he goes through on a loop, he can send his bonded Bondsmith to them even outside of a highstorm, and transport the Bondsmith into any area of the vision "map". He has almost complete control over the visions, being able to insert people as various characters within them and manipulate the passing of time, but entities such as Shards or Lift can override him. Certain places are immune to the Stormfather\'s visions, preventing him from accessing them. This included Kholinar while it was inhabited by Unmade, and Urithiru while the Sibling was partially corrupted, negating Radiant abilities. Dreams \nOutside of the visions, the Stormfather is capable of communicating through dreams. Those dreams usually take place in a blank space that seems outside of time and space. People experiencing them feel as though everything around them fades away, replaced by solid ground and wind that seems to stop in place. Unlike the visions, the dreams seem to take up no time at all in the real world. The Stormfather can also let a person "ride the storm," allowing them to experience being the storm itself; like the visions, these require the person to be within the storm unless they are a Bondsmith. The only known singer to have done this, Eshonai, gained a fundamental understanding of Roshar\'s Rhythms as well. Nahel Bond \n\nThe Stormfather is one of the three great Bondsmith spren. Forming a Nahel bond with him grants one the power over the Surges of Tension and Adhesion. He is currently bonded with Dalinar Kholin. While a Bondsmith can use Adhesion the way a Windrunner would, they can also apply their powers in different manner, using them more in the Spiritual. Using Spiritual Adhesion, a Bondsmith can form a connection between themselves and another person, allowing them to speak their language. They also seem capable of hearing the spiritual aspects of objects, and use this to mend broken things back whole. Bondsmiths can also summon Stormlight at will, although this requires significant effort. Due to his connection with highstorms, his Bondsmith will feel more energetic on highstorm days. There are several differences between the Stormfather and other Radiant spren. Unlike them, he is capable of maintaining consciousness in the Physical Realm even without the Bond, although it grants him deeper understanding of humanity and its foibles, along with the ability to empathize with others and more human responses, like cursing. He also does not become a Shardblade, either due to his immense power or due to his immense dislike for humanity. In addition, he can hear statements or questions directed to him, and speak directly into his Surgebinder\'s mind, even if he does not seem to be nearby.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Attributes and Abilities', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ae45aecb-fff1-4966-86c9-92c48405c802'}, page_content="Stormfather - His Bondsmith can also communicate with him by thinking. Honorspren \nThe Stormfather is the creator of the modern honorspren, a duty that was bestowed upon him by Honor shortly before the latter's death. Following the Recreance, where almost all of them have been killed, he stopped doing so; however, he would eventually create ten of them, which would eventually create others, leading to the resurgence of the race. Today, many honorspren treat him as an honored ancestor and obey his wishes, with Syl in particular referring to him as her father. The Stormfather, in turn, considers them his children. He apparently exerts some influence over their ability to form Nahel bonds, although he cannot stop them if their Surgebinder says the proper Oaths. He is also able to grant them more human-like emotions, but refuses to do so."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Nature', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e8b462d7-7836-4c94-ab1d-8cd120c5f092'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Nature \n\nThe Stormfather is a spren, making him naturally immortal and intangible. Unlike most other spren, he is mostly present in the Physical Realm rather than Shadesmar, and thus cannot see inside of it, even though his highstorms affect it. He is one of the most powerful spren on Roshar, with an immense amount of Investiture, greater even than that of the Unmade, although he is much more restricted than them in what he can do with it. He has merged with Tanavast's Cognitive Shadow, making him something akin to a Sliver along with being a Splinter. He considers himself to be a memory men created for the Almighty, now that the god himself is gone. It is unclear how much of Tanavast is left within him, as though he seems to share some of his memories and opinions, particularly in regards to Cultivation, his standoffish nature does not match what has been seen of Tanavast. The Stormfather's unusual nature as both a spren and a Cognitive Shadow gives some additional abilities to the Bondsmith bonded to him in the present times. Dalinar Kholin is able to use it to merge the Physical, Cognitive and Spiritual Realms, creating Honor's Perpendicularity. This allows people to travel between Shadesmar and Roshar, and releases near-infinite amounts of Stormlight into the surrounding area, albeit the perpendicularity doesn't last for long. Odium refers to the whole event as Ascending."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Nature', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e8b462d7-7836-4c94-ab1d-8cd120c5f092'}, page_content='Stormfather - Whether this can be used in another Realm beyond the Physical is unknown.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Highstorms', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '06c1e382-3526-4162-bb6c-5816d798ec98'}, page_content='Stormfather -  Highstorms \nThe Stormfather commands the highstorms, the powerful hurricanes that scour Roshar at regular intervals. While he ordinarily sticks to his schedule, he can summon them to a particular location if need be.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Highstorms', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '06c1e382-3526-4162-bb6c-5816d798ec98'}, page_content="Stormfather - The highstorms also grant him the ability to summon Stormlight, although he cannot do so outside of a highstorm. While he rides the storms, and can perceive everything within them, his consciousness is not restricted to them -- he is capable of speaking to Dalinar from great distances, and unlike other Radiant spren, he does not need to remain close to him. This being said, he does not have absolute control over everything that happens within his storms, and he's incapable of stopping singers from using it to bond with spren, even voidspren. Within a highstorm, the Stormfather is capable of communicating with people, appearing as an enormous face and speaking in a thunderous voice. Doing so slows down time greatly."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Visions', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd17fce92-fa5c-497c-a096-4f6e491280ae'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Visions \n\nThe Stormfather is capable of sending people visions, so long as his target is in an area experiencing a highstorm. Whether or not a person is currently awake or asleep is irrelevant, and it appears that the vision cannot be resisted. The visions can be given to more than one person at a time, as long as all other than his bonded Surgebinder are within a highstorm. His bonded Surgebinder is also able to enter a vision without a highstorm and is able to bring in others with them outside of a highstorm as long as they are touching the Bondsmith. When speaking to others inside of a vision, accents might not carry over. The visions the Stormfather sends out have been bestowed upon him by Honor near the end of the Shard's life, to be given to those who would be best served by them, such as possible future Bondsmiths. They play out as a pre-recorded, heavily interactive scenes, set in another place and another time. The target of the vision assumes the role of someone who lived in that time and place, and the people conjured up by the vision interact with them as though they were that person. The target cannot summon their Shardblade, although they are capable of using their Surgebinding abilities. They can, however, feel pain and attempt to act out their actions within a vision, which sometimes requires that their physical bodies be restrained."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Visions', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd17fce92-fa5c-497c-a096-4f6e491280ae'}, page_content='Stormfather - They will speak the language matching the time period and location of the vision, even if they aren\'t normally able to speak it. While the Stormfather ordinarily has a cycle of visions he goes through on a loop, he can send his bonded Bondsmith to them even outside of a highstorm, and transport the Bondsmith into any area of the vision "map". He has almost complete control over the visions, being able to insert people as various characters within them and manipulate the passing of time, but entities such as Shards or Lift can override him. Certain places are immune to the Stormfather\'s visions, preventing him from accessing them. This included Kholinar while it was inhabited by Unmade, and Urithiru while the Sibling was partially corrupted, negating Radiant abilities.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Dreams', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3660ab6e-c5d8-4f02-8715-b6706be98e6a'}, page_content='Stormfather -  Dreams \nOutside of the visions, the Stormfather is capable of communicating through dreams. Those dreams usually take place in a blank space that seems outside of time and space.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Dreams', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3660ab6e-c5d8-4f02-8715-b6706be98e6a'}, page_content='Stormfather - People experiencing them feel as though everything around them fades away, replaced by solid ground and wind that seems to stop in place. Unlike the visions, the dreams seem to take up no time at all in the real world. The Stormfather can also let a person "ride the storm," allowing them to experience being the storm itself; like the visions, these require the person to be within the storm unless they are a Bondsmith. The only known singer to have done this, Eshonai, gained a fundamental understanding of Roshar\'s Rhythms as well.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Nahel Bond', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'db23d0b9-5132-40c6-bdfc-1719edcd449e'}, page_content='Stormfather -  Nahel Bond \n\nThe Stormfather is one of the three great Bondsmith spren. Forming a Nahel bond with him grants one the power over the Surges of Tension and Adhesion. He is currently bonded with Dalinar Kholin. While a Bondsmith can use Adhesion the way a Windrunner would, they can also apply their powers in different manner, using them more in the Spiritual. Using Spiritual Adhesion, a Bondsmith can form a connection between themselves and another person, allowing them to speak their language. They also seem capable of hearing the spiritual aspects of objects, and use this to mend broken things back whole. Bondsmiths can also summon Stormlight at will, although this requires significant effort. Due to his connection with highstorms, his Bondsmith will feel more energetic on highstorm days. There are several differences between the Stormfather and other Radiant spren. Unlike them, he is capable of maintaining consciousness in the Physical Realm even without the Bond, although it grants him deeper understanding of humanity and its foibles, along with the ability to empathize with others and more human responses, like cursing.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Nahel Bond', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'db23d0b9-5132-40c6-bdfc-1719edcd449e'}, page_content="Stormfather - He also does not become a Shardblade, either due to his immense power or due to his immense dislike for humanity. In addition, he can hear statements or questions directed to him, and speak directly into his Surgebinder's mind, even if he does not seem to be nearby. His Bondsmith can also communicate with him by thinking."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Honorspren', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5f071dde-a447-438e-ba5d-d3e67d9d5691'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Honorspren \nThe Stormfather is the creator of the modern honorspren, a duty that was bestowed upon him by Honor shortly before the latter's death. Following the Recreance, where almost all of them have been killed, he stopped doing so; however, he would eventually create ten of them, which would eventually create others, leading to the resurgence of the race. Today, many honorspren treat him as an honored ancestor and obey his wishes, with Syl in particular referring to him as her father. The Stormfather, in turn, considers them his children. He apparently exerts some influence over their ability to form Nahel bonds, although he cannot stop them if their Surgebinder says the proper Oaths."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Honorspren', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5f071dde-a447-438e-ba5d-d3e67d9d5691'}, page_content='Stormfather - He is also able to grant them more human-like emotions, but refuses to do so.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '36917ac8-8fc0-45b4-8962-2c1219dba44e'}, page_content='Stormfather -  History \n\n Origins and the Recreance \n\nThe Stormfather is likely to be one of the oldest entities in the cosmere, as the highstorms he commands predate even the Shattering of Adonalsium. During the early millennia of his existence, he was not particularly cognizant or self-aware, but rather simply the uncaring storm. Even back then, however, he was capable of bonding with humans. Shortly before the Recreance, around 2000 years before the True Desolation, Honor altered the Stormfather in a frantic preparation for his own death. Among other changes, he gave him the capacity to create honorspren, as well as bestowed him with a set of visions to be sent to a person who would benefit from them, in the event of a new Desolation. Back then, the Stormfather had only childlike intelligence, although it grew over time. When the Recreance came, grieving for the lost honorspren -- which he believed included Sylphrena -- he refused to make new ones for centuries. Eventually, he created ten, who would then create children of their own, until the honorspren became a nation again. Visions and Bonds \nAt some point shortly before the True Desolation, Syl was rediscovered, and the Stormfather arranged to have her delivered to one of the honorspren cities, ordering Notum to keep an eye on her. Against his wishes, she eventually escaped to form a Nahel bond after realizing that a new Desolation was coming. Around the same time, the Stormfather began sending out his visions. While there were less than ten people to have received them, the only ones known are Gavilar and Dalinar Kholin.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '36917ac8-8fc0-45b4-8962-2c1219dba44e'}, page_content="Stormfather - Gavilar began seeing them shortly before his death, although he interpreted them far differently than they were supposed to be. This led indirectly to the creation of the Diagram, as well as Gavilar's cooperation with the Sons of Honor in a bid to bring the Heralds back, even if it meant starting a new Desolation. Following Gavilar's death, the Stormfather began sending his visions to the younger brother. This led to Dalinar's reputation in the Alethi warcamps plummeting, but also to him beginning to research the Desolations and making the first attempt at truly uniting Alethkar. At the same time, as Kaladin was bonding Syl, the Stormfather was keeping an eye on him. When Kaladin was strung up by to face his judgement by Sadeas' orders, the Stormfather appeared, as if observing him, although Kaladin later assumed it was a delirious hallucination. The Stormfather later visited Kaladin directly in a dream, where the two had a conversation. He accused Kaladin of being a traitor, and shared his belief that humans couldn't be trusted. His predictions seemingly came true when Kaladin killed Syl by breaking his bond. Stormfather visited him in a subsequent highstorm to tell him that she was dead and that Kaladin would never Surgebind again."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '36917ac8-8fc0-45b4-8962-2c1219dba44e'}, page_content="Stormfather - While he let Shallan see him as well, he didn't speak with her. During the Battle of Narak, the Stormfather spoke to Dalinar out of a vision, claiming that the Alethi were lost, and promising to send a highstorm to sweep away their bodies. At the same time, Syl began to regain her consciousness, and so the Stormfather departed to stop her from re-bonding Kaladin. Despite his best efforts, Syl succeeded, and the Stormfather reluctantly conceded allowing her to restore her bond. Following the crash of the Highstorm and Everstorm, he took the Cognitive Shadow of Eshonai and showed her the world as the storm crossed the continent, before letting her pass into the Beyond. Following the battle, Dalinar climbed to the top of Urithiru to speak with him. The Stormfather answered, explaining the Everstorm and Honor's death, whereupon Dalinar attempted to bond him. Though initially, the Stormfather was hostile to the idea, he eventually agreed once Dalinar said the Immortal Words, although under the stipulation that Dalinar would wield no Shards. Bondsmith spren \n\nThis new bond allowed the Stormfather to show Dalinar Honor's visions at will, leading to Dalinar exploring them extensively. Shortly afterwards, Dalinar asked the Stormfather to marry him and Navani, to which he agreed. From then on out, the Stormfather served as a source of information for Dalinar. While he refused to give him the reasons for the Recreance, he explained the nature of the Honorblades, as well as the reason why Honor thought the plan of fighting Odium in a contest of champions would work -- that Odium is a force of nature, and as such, bound by rules. Eventually, after a conversation concerning whether Oathbringer can be brought back to life, the Stormfather revealed that he can send visions to other people, allowing Dalinar to instantaneously communicate across vast distances, making negotiations with far away people much easier. Initially, the plan went reasonably well, with Dalinar conversing with Fen Rnamdi of Thaylenah and convincing her to consider his offer. Afterwards, the Stormfather brought him, Navani and Jasnah to the vision of Aharietiam to explore it. It was there that he told Dalinar about the origins and fate of the Heralds, though he again refused to speak about the Recreance. Shortly afterwards, during a trip back to the warcamps, he told Dalinar that he was beginning to feel empathy for people dying in his storms."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'History', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '36917ac8-8fc0-45b4-8962-2c1219dba44e'}, page_content="Stormfather - The Downward Spiral \n\nThe free exploration of the visions ended when Odium invaded one of the visions, with the Stormfather powerless to stop him. Though the great spren quickly recovered his poise, there was no doubt that he was terrified of the Shard, and for the time being, further visions were suspended. Eventually, Dalinar began inquiring about the current fate of the Heralds, and the Stormfather informed him that he could see Ishar, and that the old Binder of Gods cursed his name at night. Soon afterwards, Dalinar's memories of the burning of Rathalas returned. Afterwards, he confronted the Stormfather about his reasons for bonding a monster such as himself, to which the Stormfather answered that to him, what Dalinar had done was administering justice -- but also that now, with his bond more advanced, he understood the immorality of the act. When Dalinar traveled to Vedenar, he felt the return of the Thrill, and sought to run away. Despite the Stormfather's protests, he managed to summon something gleaming and white and used it to open the Oathgate, causing the great spren significant pain. Afterwards, Dalinar apologized to him, but the Stormfather was unbothered by the event, or at least acted as though he was. Eila Stele and Thaylen Field \n\nThe revelations of Eila Stele came soon afterwards. In the aftermath, the Stormfather explained to Dalinar the Recreance and the role Honor played in preventing it in the ages past, as well as Honor's decay shortly before his death. At the Battle of Thaylen Field, the Stormfather accompanied Dalinar to his meeting with Odium, though he couldn't explain what the thunderclasts would want with the Thaylen Gemstone Reserve. When Odium met with Dalinar, the Stormfather fell quiet, banished by the Shard's presence. He quickly returned after Dalinar managed to reject Odium's influence. After Dalinar opened Honor's Perpendicularity, the Stormfather returned, shocked and uncertain as to what was happening, though he was aware enough to accept Dalinar's words as the Third Ideal of the Bondsmiths, and to point out Taln and Shalash's presence to his Bondsmith. In the aftermath of the battle, the Stormfather briefly visited Lopen to hear out his Windrunner second ideal, chastising him for thinking he had been ready earlier. Afterwards, he allowed Dalinar and Shallan to use his presence over Kholinar to see what had happened to the city."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Origins and the Recreance', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f3ad9dc3-c8be-4166-9000-f97552185cc3'}, page_content='Stormfather -  Origins and the Recreance \n\nThe Stormfather is likely to be one of the oldest entities in the cosmere, as the highstorms he commands predate even the Shattering of Adonalsium. During the early millennia of his existence, he was not particularly cognizant or self-aware, but rather simply the uncaring storm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Origins and the Recreance', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'f3ad9dc3-c8be-4166-9000-f97552185cc3'}, page_content='Stormfather - Even back then, however, he was capable of bonding with humans. Shortly before the Recreance, around 2000 years before the True Desolation, Honor altered the Stormfather in a frantic preparation for his own death. Among other changes, he gave him the capacity to create honorspren, as well as bestowed him with a set of visions to be sent to a person who would benefit from them, in the event of a new Desolation. Back then, the Stormfather had only childlike intelligence, although it grew over time. When the Recreance came, grieving for the lost honorspren -- which he believed included Sylphrena -- he refused to make new ones for centuries. Eventually, he created ten, who would then create children of their own, until the honorspren became a nation again.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Visions and Bonds', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3ee97102-29c7-4e61-a755-f4bea5fbef0f'}, page_content='Stormfather -  Visions and Bonds \nAt some point shortly before the True Desolation, Syl was rediscovered, and the Stormfather arranged to have her delivered to one of the honorspren cities, ordering Notum to keep an eye on her. Against his wishes, she eventually escaped to form a Nahel bond after realizing that a new Desolation was coming. Around the same time, the Stormfather began sending out his visions. While there were less than ten people to have received them, the only ones known are Gavilar and Dalinar Kholin.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Visions and Bonds', 'order': 11, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '3ee97102-29c7-4e61-a755-f4bea5fbef0f'}, page_content="Stormfather - Gavilar began seeing them shortly before his death, although he interpreted them far differently than they were supposed to be. This led indirectly to the creation of the Diagram, as well as Gavilar's cooperation with the Sons of Honor in a bid to bring the Heralds back, even if it meant starting a new Desolation. Following Gavilar's death, the Stormfather began sending his visions to the younger brother. This led to Dalinar's reputation in the Alethi warcamps plummeting, but also to him beginning to research the Desolations and making the first attempt at truly uniting Alethkar. At the same time, as Kaladin was bonding Syl, the Stormfather was keeping an eye on him. When Kaladin was strung up by to face his judgement by Sadeas' orders, the Stormfather appeared, as if observing him, although Kaladin later assumed it was a delirious hallucination. The Stormfather later visited Kaladin directly in a dream, where the two had a conversation. He accused Kaladin of being a traitor, and shared his belief that humans couldn't be trusted. His predictions seemingly came true when Kaladin killed Syl by breaking his bond. Stormfather visited him in a subsequent highstorm to tell him that she was dead and that Kaladin would never Surgebind again. While he let Shallan see him as well, he didn't speak with her. During the Battle of Narak, the Stormfather spoke to Dalinar out of a vision, claiming that the Alethi were lost, and promising to send a highstorm to sweep away their bodies. At the same time, Syl began to regain her consciousness, and so the Stormfather departed to stop her from re-bonding Kaladin. Despite his best efforts, Syl succeeded, and the Stormfather reluctantly conceded allowing her to restore her bond. Following the crash of the Highstorm and Everstorm, he took the Cognitive Shadow of Eshonai and showed her the world as the storm crossed the continent, before letting her pass into the Beyond. Following the battle, Dalinar climbed to the top of Urithiru to speak with him. The Stormfather answered, explaining the Everstorm and Honor's death, whereupon Dalinar attempted to bond him. Though initially, the Stormfather was hostile to the idea, he eventually agreed once Dalinar said the Immortal Words, although under the stipulation that Dalinar would wield no Shards."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bondsmith spren', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c6d1bb23-9ef0-4f3c-a2a8-ee0212cf38c0'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Bondsmith spren \n\nThis new bond allowed the Stormfather to show Dalinar Honor's visions at will, leading to Dalinar exploring them extensively. Shortly afterwards, Dalinar asked the Stormfather to marry him and Navani, to which he agreed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Bondsmith spren', 'order': 12, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'c6d1bb23-9ef0-4f3c-a2a8-ee0212cf38c0'}, page_content='Stormfather - From then on out, the Stormfather served as a source of information for Dalinar. While he refused to give him the reasons for the Recreance, he explained the nature of the Honorblades, as well as the reason why Honor thought the plan of fighting Odium in a contest of champions would work -- that Odium is a force of nature, and as such, bound by rules. Eventually, after a conversation concerning whether Oathbringer can be brought back to life, the Stormfather revealed that he can send visions to other people, allowing Dalinar to instantaneously communicate across vast distances, making negotiations with far away people much easier. Initially, the plan went reasonably well, with Dalinar conversing with Fen Rnamdi of Thaylenah and convincing her to consider his offer. Afterwards, the Stormfather brought him, Navani and Jasnah to the vision of Aharietiam to explore it. It was there that he told Dalinar about the origins and fate of the Heralds, though he again refused to speak about the Recreance. Shortly afterwards, during a trip back to the warcamps, he told Dalinar that he was beginning to feel empathy for people dying in his storms.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Downward Spiral', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'dafacd98-9ccc-4320-9f32-92e289297421'}, page_content='Stormfather -  The Downward Spiral \n\nThe free exploration of the visions ended when Odium invaded one of the visions, with the Stormfather powerless to stop him. Though the great spren quickly recovered his poise, there was no doubt that he was terrified of the Shard, and for the time being, further visions were suspended. Eventually, Dalinar began inquiring about the current fate of the Heralds, and the Stormfather informed him that he could see Ishar, and that the old Binder of Gods cursed his name at night.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'The Downward Spiral', 'order': 13, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'dafacd98-9ccc-4320-9f32-92e289297421'}, page_content="Stormfather - Soon afterwards, Dalinar's memories of the burning of Rathalas returned. Afterwards, he confronted the Stormfather about his reasons for bonding a monster such as himself, to which the Stormfather answered that to him, what Dalinar had done was administering justice -- but also that now, with his bond more advanced, he understood the immorality of the act. When Dalinar traveled to Vedenar, he felt the return of the Thrill, and sought to run away. Despite the Stormfather's protests, he managed to summon something gleaming and white and used it to open the Oathgate, causing the great spren significant pain. Afterwards, Dalinar apologized to him, but the Stormfather was unbothered by the event, or at least acted as though he was."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Eila Stele and Thaylen Field', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '62bf1d2e-3af5-4132-a71e-fc0594617b85'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Eila Stele and Thaylen Field \n\nThe revelations of Eila Stele came soon afterwards. In the aftermath, the Stormfather explained to Dalinar the Recreance and the role Honor played in preventing it in the ages past, as well as Honor's decay shortly before his death. At the Battle of Thaylen Field, the Stormfather accompanied Dalinar to his meeting with Odium, though he couldn't explain what the thunderclasts would want with the Thaylen Gemstone Reserve. When Odium met with Dalinar, the Stormfather fell quiet, banished by the Shard's presence."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Eila Stele and Thaylen Field', 'order': 14, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '62bf1d2e-3af5-4132-a71e-fc0594617b85'}, page_content="Stormfather - He quickly returned after Dalinar managed to reject Odium's influence. After Dalinar opened Honor's Perpendicularity, the Stormfather returned, shocked and uncertain as to what was happening, though he was aware enough to accept Dalinar's words as the Third Ideal of the Bondsmiths, and to point out Taln and Shalash's presence to his Bondsmith. In the aftermath of the battle, the Stormfather briefly visited Lopen to hear out his Windrunner second ideal, chastising him for thinking he had been ready earlier. Afterwards, he allowed Dalinar and Shallan to use his presence over Kholinar to see what had happened to the city."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28a4a125-732e-432e-90f9-0d859cbde609'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Relationships \n\n Dalinar \n\nDalinar Kholin is the Stormfather's current Bondsmith; not the first one, but the first in many hundreds of years. Though the Stormfather isn't eager to bond at first, once Dalinar says the Words, the Stormfather commits to staying with Dalinar. He is still abrasive towards him, withholding information he doesn't wish to share, but he strives to help Dalinar, even in the face of Odium. He often acts as Dalinar's confidant in matters the latter is uncomfortable sharing with Navani. In return, the Stormfather gains increased empathy and understanding of human nature. He also picks up less wholesome habits, such as cursing. Honor \n\nWhile he has no choice in obeying Honor's wishes, the Stormfather greatly respects him in many ways. He trusts him implicitly, and has many good things to say about him. He seems to treat him as something of a father figure, likely due to Honor's transformation of him shortly before Tanavast's death. The Stormfather is also Honor's Cognitive Shadow to an extent. What this means is uncertain, as while the Stormfather seems to think the same way about Cultivation Honor used to, he also seems to consider himself a separate entity. Sylphrena \n\nSyl is one of the original honorspren created by the Stormfather prior to the Recreance. Perhaps because of this, he seems to adore her above all his other children, and takes care that she's not harmed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Relationships', 'order': 15, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '28a4a125-732e-432e-90f9-0d859cbde609'}, page_content='Stormfather - While she calls him her father, she\'s also clearly frustrated with how overprotective he can be, and will argue with him over what she is and isn\'t allowed to do. Kaladin \n\nThe Stormfather has mixed feelings regarding Kaladin. On one hand, he\'s furious with him for bonding Syl, and blames him for everything bad that happens to her, immediately assuming that he would kill her. Eventually, he comes to respect him somewhat, although the respect is grudging. Kaladin sometimes rides his storms in dreams, though this seems rather accidental. He\'s the only person to whom the Stormfather refers to as "child of Tanavast", for a specific, but unknown reason. Over time, the Stormfather seems to come to care for Kaladin somewhat, in his own way. He helps him travel to Urithiru from Revolar, and later hopes that the Stormblessed can safely return from Kholinar.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Dalinar', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6730516e-1531-4544-b5de-4b2278b94310'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Dalinar \n\nDalinar Kholin is the Stormfather's current Bondsmith; not the first one, but the first in many hundreds of years. Though the Stormfather isn't eager to bond at first, once Dalinar says the Words, the Stormfather commits to staying with Dalinar. He is still abrasive towards him, withholding information he doesn't wish to share, but he strives to help Dalinar, even in the face of Odium. He often acts as Dalinar's confidant in matters the latter is uncomfortable sharing with Navani. In return, the Stormfather gains increased empathy and understanding of human nature."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Dalinar', 'order': 16, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '6730516e-1531-4544-b5de-4b2278b94310'}, page_content='Stormfather - He also picks up less wholesome habits, such as cursing.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Honor', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '610248ec-863e-4bb4-95e9-810853c1226c'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Honor \n\nWhile he has no choice in obeying Honor's wishes, the Stormfather greatly respects him in many ways. He trusts him implicitly, and has many good things to say about him. He seems to treat him as something of a father figure, likely due to Honor's transformation of him shortly before Tanavast's death. The Stormfather is also Honor's Cognitive Shadow to an extent."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Honor', 'order': 17, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '610248ec-863e-4bb4-95e9-810853c1226c'}, page_content='Stormfather - What this means is uncertain, as while the Stormfather seems to think the same way about Cultivation Honor used to, he also seems to consider himself a separate entity.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sylphrena', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2dac0bc0-ff56-4dd5-8940-f9c73db045e5'}, page_content="Stormfather -  Sylphrena \n\nSyl is one of the original honorspren created by the Stormfather prior to the Recreance. Perhaps because of this, he seems to adore her above all his other children, and takes care that she's not harmed."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Sylphrena', 'order': 18, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '2dac0bc0-ff56-4dd5-8940-f9c73db045e5'}, page_content="Stormfather - While she calls him her father, she's also clearly frustrated with how overprotective he can be, and will argue with him over what she is and isn't allowed to do."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kaladin', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ab4d6eb7-1060-4286-8d0e-ea7f9a7bcc2e'}, page_content='Stormfather -  Kaladin \n\nThe Stormfather has mixed feelings regarding Kaladin. On one hand, he\'s furious with him for bonding Syl, and blames him for everything bad that happens to her, immediately assuming that he would kill her. Eventually, he comes to respect him somewhat, although the respect is grudging. Kaladin sometimes rides his storms in dreams, though this seems rather accidental. He\'s the only person to whom the Stormfather refers to as "child of Tanavast", for a specific, but unknown reason.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Kaladin', 'order': 19, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ab4d6eb7-1060-4286-8d0e-ea7f9a7bcc2e'}, page_content='Stormfather - Over time, the Stormfather seems to come to care for Kaladin somewhat, in his own way. He helps him travel to Urithiru from Revolar, and later hopes that the Stormblessed can safely return from Kholinar.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Culture', 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8c195123-8227-4d1c-a9d2-88d7415308e8'}, page_content='Stormfather -  Culture \nThe Vorin religion often identifies the Stormfather with the Almighty, as well as one or more of the Heralds. In Alethkar, it\'s commonly believed that Jezrien and the Stormfather are the same entity. In Natanatan, the same is said about Kalak. A common punishment for some criminals in Vorin countries is being strung up in a highstorm, to be "judged by the Stormfather", which typically equals a death sentence. The word "stormfather" is a common curse, similar to other variations of the word "storm". The listeners believe him to be a traitor to their kind, who protected humans instead of them.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Culture', 'order': 20, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '8c195123-8227-4d1c-a9d2-88d7415308e8'}, page_content="Stormfather - They still respect him, though, believing that he would kill anyone who doesn't, leading to a mix of awe and fear in their society."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e1b55558-78cb-4a90-9dd5-a1ac6a828f2b'}, page_content='Stormfather -  Trivia \nThe Stormfather has two different "modes" of speech. He uses  when talking to those unbonded to him, or when speaking so that everyone can hear him. He speaks normally when communicating directly with Dalinar after the latter becomes a Bondsmith. Interestingly, there are only four other characters shown speaking in small caps:\n Cultivation when she met Dalinar in the Valley. Odium when preventing a Fused from taking Venli\'s body, when he tells Dalinar , and when he speaks to Vyre.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 21, 'parent_article': 'Stormfather', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'e1b55558-78cb-4a90-9dd5-a1ac6a828f2b'}, page_content="Stormfather - Syl when about to be resurrected by Kaladin. Dalinar when Connecting Kaladin to a vision of Tien and subsequently accepting Kaladin's Fourth Ideal."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'order': 0, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '7fdb4be1-ba39-41dc-85b2-28e9fae0573e'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow - Cognitive Shadow, also known as a Type Two Invested entity,  is a term used to refer to a spirit that has not yet moved into the afterlife. While the manifestations of this kind of entity can vary depending on the world it occurs on, Cognitive Shadows can occur on any planet in the cosmere.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Mechanics', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '20937de7-f512-42b8-a93a-9d9cf69ce733'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow -  Mechanics \nCognitive Shadows can be created by a variety of processes. Some of them are created when a person has sufficient attachment to something in the Physical Realm. When a Vessel that has held onto a Shard for a long time dies it becomes a Cognitive Shadow that can continue to act. Depending on how they are made, Cognitive Shadows are sometimes bound to the planetary system they were made on, and are unable to leave it either through the Physical or Cognitive Realm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Mechanics', 'order': 1, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '20937de7-f512-42b8-a93a-9d9cf69ce733'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow - It is possible to overcome this issue. The Cognitive aspect of a recently deceased person can become a Cognitive Shadow by finding a source of Investiture to anchor themselves to the Cognitive Realm before passing on to the Beyond. The Investiture replaces the parts of the soul that connects it to the Three Realms, providing an anchor for it in the Cognitive Realm. Some Vessels can prepare a Cognitive Shadow at or just prior to their death or Splintering, allowing a portion of their power to continue to function with a small amount of direction; the Stormfather is an example of this. It is theoretically possible for a Cognitive Shadow to form a Nahel bond with a human. They are not able to burn God Metals. They may be able to create objects from nothing, if they view it as an extension of themselves and are Connected to them. Cognitive Shadows look different in the Cognitive Realm, where how they became a Cognitive Shadow will influence how they look. Shards could create a physical body for Cognitive Shadows. Destruction \nA Cognitive Shadow can be permanently killed by the use of a raysium dagger touching a gem of anti-Light of the type of Investiture associated with the Cognitive Shadow. For instance, a raysium dagger with an anti-Voidlight gem can permanently kill a Fused, and a Herald can presumably be similarly killed with anti-Stormlight. Cognitive Shadows will turn into sunhearts when exposed to the sun on Canticle. Additionally, Cognitive Shadows can be killed by negating their Connection to all three Realms, a process which destroys the anchor against the pull of the Beyond. The experience is described as having your soul ripped apart. A Cognitive Shadow can also willingly choose to pass into the Beyond. Cognitive Influence \nCognitive Shadows are influenced by how people view them over time, although this takes centuries due to their own strong sense of self. But Cognitive Shadows with less sense of self, or less controlled by another source, are more easily malleable by Cognitive influence. Cognitive Shadows that are normally invisible to people in the Physical Realm can still be seen and heard by people who exist partly in the Cognitive Realm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Destruction', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cee99cb6-70f3-4482-8ff0-5643d5569acf'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow -  Destruction \nA Cognitive Shadow can be permanently killed by the use of a raysium dagger touching a gem of anti-Light of the type of Investiture associated with the Cognitive Shadow. For instance, a raysium dagger with an anti-Voidlight gem can permanently kill a Fused, and a Herald can presumably be similarly killed with anti-Stormlight. Cognitive Shadows will turn into sunhearts when exposed to the sun on Canticle.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Destruction', 'order': 2, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'cee99cb6-70f3-4482-8ff0-5643d5569acf'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow - Additionally, Cognitive Shadows can be killed by negating their Connection to all three Realms, a process which destroys the anchor against the pull of the Beyond. The experience is described as having your soul ripped apart. A Cognitive Shadow can also willingly choose to pass into the Beyond.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cognitive Influence', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5f66b963-e33a-4325-b36e-6745ce0f4ce9'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow -  Cognitive Influence \nCognitive Shadows are influenced by how people view them over time, although this takes centuries due to their own strong sense of self. But Cognitive Shadows with less sense of self, or less controlled by another source, are more easily malleable by Cognitive influence.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Cognitive Influence', 'order': 3, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5f66b963-e33a-4325-b36e-6745ce0f4ce9'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow - Cognitive Shadows that are normally invisible to people in the Physical Realm can still be seen and heard by people who exist partly in the Cognitive Realm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Examples', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ebd050b7-9178-4683-808e-4e79d9c79a37'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow -  Examples \n Roshar \nFused\nWhen the singers turned to Odium for help in fighting off the humans, he responded by infusing some of them with his power, which turned them into Cognitive Shadows. They reside on Braize, but return to Roshar during every Desolation. Since they lost their bodies long ago, they must possess the bodies of living singers; in doing so they destroy the mind of the possessed body. This cycle of rebirth strains the minds of the Fused and, eventually, they go crazy.Their status as Cognitive Shadows grants them access to the Surges. Odium could remove the Investiture that maintains a Fused, which would send that Fused to the Beyond. Heralds\nWhen the Heralds of The Almighty took up the Oathpact, they gained a direct connection to Honor. This connection transformed them into Cognitive Shadows. Each time they return to Roshar, a new body is created for them. Unlike the Returned, they do not need to consume Investiture to remain in their bodies. Stormfather\nPrior to Odium\'s splintering of Honor, the Stormfather was just the spren of the highstorm and one of the three Bondsmith spren. After Honor\'s death, the Cognitive Shadow of its Vessel, Tanavast, merged with the Stormfather, though it does not appear that the Stormfather has Tanavast\'s memories. Scadrial \nKelsier\n\nAfter his death, Kelsier found the Well of Ascension in the Cognitive Realm and, with Leras\' help, merged with it. As a result, he became infused with Preservation\'s power and became a Cognitive Shadow, though, since the Well was created as a prison, he was unable to leave. After Vin released Ruin from the Well he was able to travel the Scadrian Cognitive Realm and influence the Physical Realm, though he was unable to actually leave the Cognitve Realm because his "ties to the Physical Realm [had] been severed" by his death. With the help of a device made by the Ire, he was able to hold the Shard of Preservation after Leras died, though, according to Ruin, he made for a weaker Vessel than a normal person. Some time after the Catacendre, Kelsier found a way to recreate his physical body using Hemalurgy and return to the Physical Realm. Upon death, he lost his ability to use Allomancy and has not recovered it despite regaining a body. Nalthis \nReturned\nWhen Endowment Returns someone after death, she uses a divine Breath to "staple" the Cognitive Shadow of the deceased person back to that person\'s body. This process results in the Returned losing any memories of their prior life. Returned must consume one Breath every eight days to fuel their divine Breath. Vasher states that he is a Type Two Invested Entity because he died while “drenched in power” and left behind a “fossil of a soul”. Lifeless\nIf a Lifeless were created with extra Breath, that Breath might start to take on a "personality" like a Cognitive Shadow would have. Threnody \nShades\nShades are a unique kind of Cognitive Shadow found on Threnody that are able to interact with the Physical Realm.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Examples', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ebd050b7-9178-4683-808e-4e79d9c79a37'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow - They are drawn by anyone moving quickly at night, lighting a fire, or drawing blood and their touch withers a person, which usually results in death. Any person or animal killed by a Shade becomes a Shade. It is unknown how the first Shades were created, though, when Nazh first meets Kelsier, he is shocked that Kelsier managed to become a Cognitive Shadow and says it is "an important rite ... with requirements and traditions." Shades are repelled and can be harmed by silver, though it is unknown whether this applies to other kinds of Cognitive Shadows as well. They also are not as self-aware as normal Cognitive Shadows. If some other Cognitive Shadow traveled to Threnody, he or she would not become a Shade, and if a Shade managed to leave Threnody, it would not be destroyed. Differences between Shades and normal Cognitive Shadows are a result of the nature of the Investiture on Threnody and the lack of a Shard. Komashi \nNightmares\nNightmares are former inhabitants of the kingdom of Torio, who are kept in servitude under the father machine. They were killed by the father machine, which absorbed their souls and destroyed their bodies.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Examples', 'order': 4, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'ebd050b7-9178-4683-808e-4e79d9c79a37'}, page_content="Cognitive Shadow - During the night, the control of the machine over them loosens, and they wander the planet looking for humans for cognitive activity to feed off of. Following the destruction of the father machine and dissolution of the shroud, they dissolved into Investiture and vanished. They are defended against by painters, who are able to force them into more harmless shapes, forcing them to dissolve away into black mist. Yoki-hijo\nThe Yoki-hijo reformed after being killed by the father machine due to how heavily Invested they were. The father machine subsequently trapped them in simulations of their former life, constantly erasing their memory, and having them repeat a simulation of the same day ad infinitum. Body Swapping\nHijo are able to form a Spiritual Connection between two individuals and have them swap bodies with each other. Those linked will swap bodies every day, where one is in control of the other's body while the other is a Cognitive Shadow. This Connection can be forcibly severed, causing the two to no longer swap bodies."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Roshar', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5f7581d0-8abe-4f12-a82d-7dc643d41cd4'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow -  Roshar \nFused\nWhen the singers turned to Odium for help in fighting off the humans, he responded by infusing some of them with his power, which turned them into Cognitive Shadows. They reside on Braize, but return to Roshar during every Desolation. Since they lost their bodies long ago, they must possess the bodies of living singers; in doing so they destroy the mind of the possessed body. This cycle of rebirth strains the minds of the Fused and, eventually, they go crazy.Their status as Cognitive Shadows grants them access to the Surges. Odium could remove the Investiture that maintains a Fused, which would send that Fused to the Beyond. Heralds\nWhen the Heralds of The Almighty took up the Oathpact, they gained a direct connection to Honor. This connection transformed them into Cognitive Shadows.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Roshar', 'order': 5, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '5f7581d0-8abe-4f12-a82d-7dc643d41cd4'}, page_content="Cognitive Shadow - Each time they return to Roshar, a new body is created for them. Unlike the Returned, they do not need to consume Investiture to remain in their bodies. Stormfather\nPrior to Odium's splintering of Honor, the Stormfather was just the spren of the highstorm and one of the three Bondsmith spren. After Honor's death, the Cognitive Shadow of its Vessel, Tanavast, merged with the Stormfather, though it does not appear that the Stormfather has Tanavast's memories."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Scadrial', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '78f2b962-e819-4ac8-9ce2-c5376ce23250'}, page_content="Cognitive Shadow -  Scadrial \nKelsier\n\nAfter his death, Kelsier found the Well of Ascension in the Cognitive Realm and, with Leras' help, merged with it. As a result, he became infused with Preservation's power and became a Cognitive Shadow, though, since the Well was created as a prison, he was unable to leave."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Scadrial', 'order': 6, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '78f2b962-e819-4ac8-9ce2-c5376ce23250'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow - After Vin released Ruin from the Well he was able to travel the Scadrian Cognitive Realm and influence the Physical Realm, though he was unable to actually leave the Cognitve Realm because his "ties to the Physical Realm [had] been severed" by his death. With the help of a device made by the Ire, he was able to hold the Shard of Preservation after Leras died, though, according to Ruin, he made for a weaker Vessel than a normal person. Some time after the Catacendre, Kelsier found a way to recreate his physical body using Hemalurgy and return to the Physical Realm. Upon death, he lost his ability to use Allomancy and has not recovered it despite regaining a body.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Nalthis', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd9f39003-3d89-4f08-8a09-60fc30863752'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow -  Nalthis \nReturned\nWhen Endowment Returns someone after death, she uses a divine Breath to "staple" the Cognitive Shadow of the deceased person back to that person\'s body. This process results in the Returned losing any memories of their prior life.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Nalthis', 'order': 7, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'd9f39003-3d89-4f08-8a09-60fc30863752'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow - Returned must consume one Breath every eight days to fuel their divine Breath. Vasher states that he is a Type Two Invested Entity because he died while “drenched in power” and left behind a “fossil of a soul”. Lifeless\nIf a Lifeless were created with extra Breath, that Breath might start to take on a "personality" like a Cognitive Shadow would have.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Threnody', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fc673fbd-0b31-4419-ae60-43ecb6075cef'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow -  Threnody \nShades\nShades are a unique kind of Cognitive Shadow found on Threnody that are able to interact with the Physical Realm. They are drawn by anyone moving quickly at night, lighting a fire, or drawing blood and their touch withers a person, which usually results in death.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Threnody', 'order': 8, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': 'fc673fbd-0b31-4419-ae60-43ecb6075cef'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow - Any person or animal killed by a Shade becomes a Shade. It is unknown how the first Shades were created, though, when Nazh first meets Kelsier, he is shocked that Kelsier managed to become a Cognitive Shadow and says it is "an important rite ... with requirements and traditions." Shades are repelled and can be harmed by silver, though it is unknown whether this applies to other kinds of Cognitive Shadows as well. They also are not as self-aware as normal Cognitive Shadows. If some other Cognitive Shadow traveled to Threnody, he or she would not become a Shade, and if a Shade managed to leave Threnody, it would not be destroyed. Differences between Shades and normal Cognitive Shadows are a result of the nature of the Investiture on Threnody and the lack of a Shard.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Komashi', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '33372bf6-096a-4dc8-ae3d-4d0980597845'}, page_content='Cognitive Shadow -  Komashi \nNightmares\nNightmares are former inhabitants of the kingdom of Torio, who are kept in servitude under the father machine. They were killed by the father machine, which absorbed their souls and destroyed their bodies.'), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Komashi', 'order': 9, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '33372bf6-096a-4dc8-ae3d-4d0980597845'}, page_content="Cognitive Shadow - During the night, the control of the machine over them loosens, and they wander the planet looking for humans for cognitive activity to feed off of. Following the destruction of the father machine and dissolution of the shroud, they dissolved into Investiture and vanished. They are defended against by painters, who are able to force them into more harmless shapes, forcing them to dissolve away into black mist. Yoki-hijo\nThe Yoki-hijo reformed after being killed by the father machine due to how heavily Invested they were. The father machine subsequently trapped them in simulations of their former life, constantly erasing their memory, and having them repeat a simulation of the same day ad infinitum. Body Swapping\nHijo are able to form a Spiritual Connection between two individuals and have them swap bodies with each other. Those linked will swap bodies every day, where one is in control of the other's body while the other is a Cognitive Shadow. This Connection can be forcibly severed, causing the two to no longer swap bodies."), Document(metadata={'heading': 'Trivia', 'order': 10, 'parent_article': 'Cognitive Shadow', 'keywords': '', 'doc_id': '384602d4-418c-4067-b957-61b1b1ffe9ca'}, page_content="Cognitive Shadow -  Trivia \n The mist spirit that Vin sees during The Well of Ascension is not a Cognitive Shadow. Depending on the scene, it was an actual manifestation of Preservation or Ruin's imitation of that manifestation.")]